# Chapter 3 - Designing and implementing WCF services

## Part 1 - Create a WCF service

WCF is about distributed and SOA (Service-oriented architecture) apps.

### SOA concepts

* Service - a component that can do one or more tasks
* Service definition - WCF uses contracts, the service definition is a contract defining a service feature.
* Binding - the transport, encoding & protocol.
* Serialisation - transforming the data for transport

Service oriented architecture has:

* Explicit boundaries
* Autonomous services
* Based around schemas & contracts, not classes/DLLs
* Service compatibility is based on policy

### Creating contracts

There are different types of contract:

* ServiceContract attribute - a service
* OperationContract attribute - operation, part of a service
* DataContract attribute - serialisable datatype
* FaultContract attribute - platform-agnostic exception information

WCF can be self-hosted and can be libraries or apps. You could build one with a regular class library and add references, but the WCF template does this for you.

The project template is created with references to `System.ServiceModel` and `System.Runtime.Serialization` and an `App.config`. There is a IService interface definition and the Service.cs class itself.

The contract aspect of services is implemented with `Interfaces`. Generally the interface not the implementing class is decorated with `ServiceContract`.

The types that are being used can be decorated with `DataContract` to ensure they're serialisable.

Methods not defined in the interface (and thus contract) are possible but won't be available to the client, the same if methods are defined but not decorated with `OperationContract`.

**If the eam features a custom data type, it must be serialisable with the `DataContract` attribute**

### Endpoints

To use a service you must know the endpoint

* A - address - the URI
* B - binding - the hosting mechanism
* C - contract - the interface

There are lots of different bindings types:

BasicHttpBinding
WSHttpBinding
WSFederationHttpBinding
NetTcpBinding
NetNamedPipeBinding

The bindings have different options for security (nonde, message, transport, mixed), session (none, reliable session, transport) and transactions (y/n).

### WCF processing pipeline

In between the client & service is a pipeline.

A proxy class is created for the client to enable interaction with the service's methods.

The request is serialised and sent via the protocol specified in the binding; client data is deserialised for the service to consume it.

To serialise data it's good to use platform agnostic primitive datatypes like strings, bytes, integers.

### DataContract

In WCF the default is DataContract (serialisations are opt-in) - the predecessor used XmlSerialier (serialisations are opt-out).

The `KnownTypeAttribute` can indicate that a type be serialised.

A type won't be serialised if the item is derived from the contract, is an interface or if it is transmitted as an object.

You can use the `KnownType` to specify how it can be serialised.

Generally polymorphism should be avoided in SOA.

You need to decorate any complex type returned by a service with the `DataContract` attribute. You can specify the class name and a namespace (in case of conflicting names).

### DataMember

DataMember is used to decorate a serialisable property. There are a few options:

* EmitDefaultValue - default to true. Ie, null for reference types.
* Name - different name for clients to consume
* IsRequired - prop must have a value if true
* Order - the order of serialisation
* TypeId - if defined in a derived class, returns a unique identifier

**EmitDefaultValue might be in a question on size of serialised message**

### EnumMember

To decorate the possible values of an enum.

* Name - returns the name of the enum
* Value - returns the value of the enum
* BuiltInTypeKind - returns the kind of this type
* Documentation - gets/sets a documentation object

### FaultContracts

Technology/platform-agnostic way of dealing with failures. To present information safe for consumers of the service. 

You can define the types of fault that will be thrown in the `FaultContract` and throw a generic `FaultException<T>`.

The `FautReason` can be used to give extra information about the fault (ie, SOAP 1.1 or SOAP 1.2 and other codes like VersionMismatch, MustUnderstand).

The binding may affect the type of faultcodes used as BasicHttpBinding supports SOAP 1.1 but WsHttpBinding uses SOAP 1.2

You can also use the MessageFault class for a granular message/error handling such as with a hack attempt on a username/password.

There are various overloads for `FaultException`.

### Implementing inspectors

We can extend the WCF processing pipeline using:

* Parameter inspection
* Message formatting
* Message inspecting

A parameter inspector could be used for client side validation to save a server round-trip.

This is done with the `IParameterInspector` interface, with the `BeforeCall()` and `AfterCall()` methods. You can add a reference to this class client-side to the Behaviours collection of the Operations property of the proxy class:

`ProxyInstance.Endpoint.Contract.Operations[0].Behaviours.Add(new UserNameInspector());`

Here, the UserNameInspector class must inherit `Attribute` and `IOperationBehaviour`

### Implementing Message inspectors

Used to inspect a message before/after processing. Using the `IDispatchMessageInspector` interface and the `AfterReceiveRequest()` or `BeforeSendReply()` methods.

By using the `MessageInspector` you can add/remove/edit the behaviour with configuration:

```
<extensions>
 <behaviorExtensions>
 <add name="clientSample" type="Samples.WCF.Services.ClientInspector, ClientHost, Version=1.0.0.0, Culture=neutral, PublicKeyToken=null"/>
 </behaviorExtensions>
</extensions>
```

The `IClientMessageInspector` interface has the `AfterReceiveReply()` and `BeforeSendRequest()` methods and similar configuration options. The class can be created client side, server side or both.

## Part 2 - Configure WCF services by using configuration settings.

All aspects can be set in code or in configuration files, but files are better as they can be changed without recompiling, or even access to the source.

An app can be a **service** a **client** or both

You can use the wizard to specify the configuration file and you can set a number of elements:

* A new service element `<system.ServiceModel> <services>`
* The services and corresponding contracts
* The service comms mode (HTTP, TCP, MSMQ, etc).
* The interoperability mode (basic, advanced [adv w/Simplex or Duplex comms])

As an example:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<configuration>
 <system.serviceModel>
 <services>
 <service name="Samples.WCF.Services.TestService">
 <endpoint address=http://www.williamgryan.mobi/samples/487 binding="wsDualHttpBinding" bindingConfiguration="" name="DualHttp" contract="Samples.WCF.Services.ITestService" />
 </service>
 </services>
 </system.serviceModel>
</configuration>
```

### Service metadata

Metadata endpoints are prefixed *mex* for *metadata-exchange*.

* mexHttpBinding
* mexHttpsBinding
* mexNamedPipeBinding
* mexMsmqBinding

An exmple of using a binding would be to put the following in a `<service>` section:

```
<endpoint binding="mexHttpBinding" bindingConfiguration="" name="Mex" contract="IMetadataExchange" />
```

You can also specify **EndpointBehaviours** and **ServiceBehaviours** such as:

* Client credentials
* Transaction batching
* The data contract serialiserw

These would go in the System.serviceModel section of the config:

```
 <behaviors>
 <serviceBehaviors>
 <behavior name="Debug">
 <serviceDebug />
 </behavior>
 </serviceBehaviors>
 </behaviors>
 <services>
 <service behaviorConfiguration="Debug" name="Samples.WCF.Services.TestService">
```

The service behaviourConfiguration is specified.

THere are also protocol mappings to map specific schemes (http) to a binding (BasicHttpBinding).

### Configuring service endpoints

This can be done in a similar way with the WCF service configuration editor or in the config file directly.

As per service behaviours, they are also added and referenced in the same way:

```
<endpointBehaviors>
 <behavior name="wsHttpBehaviorSample">
 <clientCredentials />
 </behavior>
 </endpointBehavior>
<endpoint address=http://www.williamgryan.mobi/samples/487  behaviorConfiguration="wsHttpBehaviorSample" binding="wsHttpBinding" bindingConfiguration="" name="WsHttp" contract="Samples.WCF.Services.ITestService" />
```

### Configuring bindings

You can configure the binding in the editor or in code.

Adding a protocolMapping section will specify the default binding configuration if if one was not identified.


## Part 3 - Configure WCF Services by using the API

It is also possible to configure service endpoints, service behaviours, bindings, a service contract and metadata exposition via the API.

It is even possible to dynamically use the API to set configuration based on DB or XML values.

### Service endpoints

Can be done in the API, which supports `WsHttpBinding`, `WsDualHttpBinding`, `WsFederationHttpBinding` and `NetTcpBinding`.

### Configuring service behaviours

You can define service behaviours with the `ServiceBehaviourAttribute`, or method-specific behaviours with `OperationBehaviourAttribute`s.


`ServiceBehaviour` can only decorate the implementation (service) and includes name, namespace (xmlns):

`[ServiceBehaviour(Name="Example", Namespace="SomeNamespace.SecondQualifier")]`

When defined in the ServiceContract, the Name/Namespace set the `<portType>` WSDL element.

### Configuring bindings

In addition to the out of the box bindings, you can write your own.

The default bindings can be used and set up as follows, default with sercurity mode options or from a config file:

```
// Default BasicHttpBinding
BasicHttpBinding BasicHttp = new BasicHttpBinding();
// SecurityMode Specified
// SecurityMode values include None, Transport, Message, TransportCredentialOnly
// and TransportWithMessageCredential
BasicHttpBinding BasicHttpSecurity = new BasicHttpBinding(BasicHttpSecurityMode.None);
// Using Binding configured in .config file
BasicHttpBinding BasicHttpConfig = new BasicHttpBinding("BasicHttpBindingConfigSample");
```

The `wsHttpBinding` uses SOAP 1.2 has support for WS-* standards and more features/support.

```
// Default wsHttpBinding
WSHttpBinding WsHttp = new WSHttpBinding();
// SecurityMode Specified
// SecurityMode values include None, Transport, Message
// and TransportWithMessageCredential
WSHttpBinding WsHttpSecurity = new WSHttpBinding(SecurityMode.None);
// Uses Binding configured in .config file
WSHttpBinding WsHttpConfig = new WSHttpBinding("wsHttpBindingConfigSample");
// Sets the Security mode and indicates whether or not
// ReliableSessionEnabled should be Enabled or Not
WSHttpBinding WsHttpReliable = new WSHttpBinding(SecurityMode.None, true);
```

There are similar other options for `NetMsmqBinding` and `NetNamedPipeBinding`. Net pipes are for intra-machine comms.

### Custom bindings

You can use these when the built-ins don't do the job and you can extend an existing one or write a new one.

In config, you can use `<customBinding>` (all except 7 & 8 are required):

1. `TransactionFlowBindingElement`
2. `ReliableSessionBindingElement`
3. `SecurityBindingElement`
4. `CompositeDuplexBindingElement`
5. `OneWayBindingElement`
6. `SslStreamSecurityBindingElement` or `WindowsStreamSecurityBindingElement`
7. (required) a message encoding binding element `TextMessageEncodingBindingElement`, `BinaryMessageEncodingBindingElement`, etc.
8. (required) a transport element `TcpTransportBindingElement`, `HttpTransportBindingElement`, etc...

### Specifying a service contract

As mentioned previously, you can define the service contract with attributes on the class or interface (contract) but not both.

Not setting a value in the attribute's constructor can lead to the default values for **name**, **namespace** and **protection level** of the class type's name, *http://tempuri.org* and `ProtectionLevelNone`.

### Expose a service's metadata

The config file entries are automatically made when building in Visual Studio.

You can define the metadata bindings per:

```
String uriString = "http://yourhost/Samples.WCF.Services/TestService/";
Uri[] baseAddresses = new Uri[]{new Uri(uriString)};
ServiceHost hoster =
new ServiceHost(typeof(TestService), baseAddresses );
CreateMexHttpBinding
hoster.AddServiceEndpoint(ServiceMetadataBehavior.MexContractName, MetadataExchangeBindings.CreateMexHttpBinding(), "mexBindingHttp");
CreateMexHttpsBinding
hoster.AddServiceEndpoint(ServiceMetadataBehavior.MexContractName, MetadataExchangeBindings.CreateMexHttpsBinding(), "mexBindingHttps");
CreateMexTcpBinding
hoster.AddServiceEndpoint(ServiceMetadataBehavior.MexContractName, MetadataExchangeBindings.CreateMexTcpBinding(), "mexBindingTcp");
```


## Part 4 - Secure a WCF service

WCF has message-level security, transport-level security and a mixture of both.

### Implement message level security

This is turned on by default now, is an implementation of WS-Security spec. Augments SOAP messages with CIA (Confidentiality, Integrity, Authentication).

The `Security.Mode` enum can be specified in API:

```
public void ShowMessageSecurity(){
 // Set Security Mode to Message in Constructor
 WSHttpBinding WsHttpSecurity = new WSHttpBinding(SecurityMode.Message);
 // Use default constructor
 WSHttpBinding wsHttpSecurity2 = new WSHttpBinding();
 // Set the Security property manually
 wsHttpSecurity2.Security.Mode = SecurityMode.Message;
} 
```

There are different enum values for basicHttp and netNamedPipe, etc.

You can also specify in configuration.

### Implement transport level security

Transport level security works by setting the mode to Transport, not message:

```
public void ShowMessageSecurity()
{
 // Set Security Mode to Message in Constructor
 WSHttpBinding WsHttpSecurity = new WSHttpBinding(SecurityMode.Transport);
 // Use default constructor
WSHttpBinding WsHttpSecurity2 = new WSHttpBinding();
 // Set the Security property manually
 WsHttpSecurity2.Security.Mode = SecurityMode.Transport;
} 
```

You can use Transport or TransportWithMessageCredential

### Implement certificates

TO use certificates, reference `System.Security`, intall the certificate and set the `<security>` and `<message>` bindings to `TransportWithMessageCredential` and set the `ClientCredentialType` property. You can check for the certificate on the client with:

```
var MyFactory = new ChannelFactory<ITestService>("*");
MyFactory.Credentials.ClientCredentials.Certificate = X509.CurrentUser.
My.SubjectDistinguishedName.Find("CN=CLIENT").FirstOrDefault();
```


## Part 5 - Consume WCF services

To consume a service, you need information about it - usually create a proxy class to handle comms.

You can do it one of three ways:

### Generate a proxy with Svcutil.exe

**Svcutil.exe** is a command line tool for creating proxy classes. It can also export metadata documents, validate service code, download metadata documents from services and generate serialisation code.

There are a number of available command line switches:

```
/directory:<directory> | /?
/help | /?
/noLogo
/svcUtilConfig:<file>
/target:<outputType> | /t
/async | /a
/internal | /i
/serializer | /ser
/out | /o
/language | /l
```

### Generating proxies with a service reference

This can be done from the `Project > Add Service Reference...` menu option.

* You can use **Discover** when the serivec is in the solution
* When multiple services are found, you can specify the namespace
* You can use the **Go** button along with a URI to find a service

You can also specify more specific features with the advanced button.

### Creating and implementing channel factories

Used in conjunction with a service contract, you can use it with configuration or without.

`ChannelFactory<ITestService> Proxy = new ChannelFactory<ITestService>();`

You could also specify the constructo with a binding, a `ServiceEndpoint`, both etc.

You could use a ChannelFactory as follows:

```
ITestService serviceInstance = proxy.CreateChannel();
String[] outlineItems = serviceInstance.GetExamOutline("70-487");
String questionOne = serviceInstance.GetQuestionText(1);
AnswerSet[] answersQuestionOne = serviceInstance.GetQuestionAnswers(1);
AnswerDetails answersDetailsQuestionOne = serviceInstance.GetAnswerDetails(1);
proxy.Close(new TimeSpan(0,0,1,0,0));
```

It throws an exception if it fails to .Close within the timespan.

**You don't need the service class definition to use this.**

The interface may be used in various places in the code.


## Part 6 - Version a WCF service

You can version changes to contract, address, implementation or when bindings are added/removed.

These can fall into breaking and nonbreaking changes.

### Contract versioning

This could include adding or changing operations or alternatively changing the behaviour, or components or message elements.

Compatibility is what matters. Ie, adding extra methods is fine but removing or changing existing ones is breaking.

**Strict vs lax versioning**: WCF/asmx can tolerate small changes without breaking but some clients may not.

**Configuring address, binding and routing service versioning**: changes might necessitate different bindings (ie, moving from basicHttpBinding to wsHttpBinding).

## Part 7 - Create and configure WCF on Azure

You can deploy in-cloud, on-prem or hybrid.

You can go hybrid with `Service Bus Relay`, to expose internal microservices.

To use this, you will set up a binding:

### WCF service bindings

ABC - address, binding, contract.

You can deploy a WCF service directly to a web role or web site.

There's a nuget package: **Windows Azure Service Bus**.

To host a service, you need to create a ServiceHost instance:

```
ServiceHost sh = new ServiceHost(typeof(SecretService));
sh.AddServiceEndpoint(
 typeof(ISecretService), new NetTcpBinding(),
 "net.tcp://localhost:9358/secretservice");
sh.AddServiceEndpoint(
 typeof(ISecretService), new NetTcpRelayBinding(),
 ServiceBusEnvironment.CreateServiceUri("sb", "wcfonazure", "secretservice"))
 .Behaviors.Add(new TransportClientEndpointBehavior
 {
 TokenProvider = TokenProvider.CreateSharedSecretTokenProvider(
 "owner",
 "D1Kmb83CCLrAtz4du9vb3xn99DaM2dH4jQqSec98if4=")
 });
sh.Open();
Console.WriteLine("Press ENTER to close");
Console.ReadLine();
sh.Close();
```

As well as the above, you can specify this all in code in the `App.config`. You do this via the `service > endpoint` and `tokenProvider > sharedSecret` nodes.

It is recommended to use **netTcpRelayBinding**, though there are others possible if needed. All the bindings have **Relay** in the name.

Service bus can make a secure connection through a firewall via tcp but if not available it can use HTTP/S.

### Relay bindings to Azure service-bus endpoints

You can set up endpoints in the Azure portal and specify the namespace/region. It provides the connection string you'll need to use.

You can also use azure to inspect the relay.

### Integrating with the Azure service-bus relay 

To connect, you can use the namespace, owner name (defaults to owner) and the key. You could also use SAML or SimpleWebToken if needed.

An example of connecting to azure:

```
var cf = new ChannelFactory<ISecretServiceChannel>(
 new NetTcpRelayBinding(),
 new EndpointAddress(ServiceBusEnvironment.CreateServiceUri(
 "sb",
 "wcfonazure",
 "secretservice")));
cf.Endpoint.Behaviors.Add(new TransportClientEndpointBehavior
{
 TokenProvider = TokenProvider.CreateSharedSecretTokenProvider(
 "owner",
 "D1Kmb83CCLrAtz4du9vb3xn99DaM2dH4jQqSec98if4=")
});
using (var ch = cf.CreateChannel())
{
 Console.WriteLine(ch.GetSecretData(42));
}
Console.ReadLine();
```


## Part 8 - Implement messaging patterns

MEPs - message exchange patterns. These define how a server exchanges data. There are datagram, request-response and duplex. 

### Message exchange patterns

**OneWay**: You can implement one way (fire and forget) messaging with the OneWay attribute (and void return type):

```
[OperationContract(IsOneWay=true)]
void DoSomething(string param);
```

This can cause problems for multiple OneWay requests and bindings configured to use sessions - a long running request could block subsequent requests, unless called async.

OneWay is a good option for logging or low-priority messages.

**Streaming/duplex** - ther ear e*Buffered* and *Streaming* modes.

Buffered is default. Streaming is useful for large audio or video files.

The `maxReceivedMessageSize` can be used to restrict input messages and prevent DoS attacks.

You need to define the return type in the contract as a stream.

```
<basicHttpBinding>
 <binding name="HttpStreaming" maxReceivedMessageSize="67108864" transferMode="Streamed"/>
</basicHttpBinding>
<customBinding>
 <binding name="487CustomBinding">
 <textMessageEncoding messageVersion="Soap12WSAddressing10" />
 <httpTransport transferMode="Streamed" maxReceivedMessageSize="67108864"/>
 </binding>
</customBinding>
```

The transfer mode could be:

* Buffered
* Streamed
* StreamedRequest (buffer the response)
* StreamedResponse (buffer the request)

Streaming is good where the object transferred is likely to fill more than one buffer.

Only the following bindings support transfer mode:

* BasicHttpBinding
* NetTcpBinding
* NetNamedPipeBinding

Streamed ops can only have 1 input/output param.
SOAP headers are always Buffered
SOAP message security relies on buffers.

**Request/reply** is the default pattern of client-service communication (and http). It must be initiated by the client.

In **duplex** messaging, any endpoint can send messages to any other endpoint. Comms must occur within one session. Duplexing requires an additional contract - the callback contract, specified in the `CallbackContract` property.

### Implementing Azure service bus & queues

You could use a relay to help connect apps - on-prem to cloud or multiple cloud apps. This allows bi-directional comms and doesn't store messages.

A queue allows one-directional comms - the queue stores the message until a client reads it. This can be extended with *topics* which are subscriptions - a client can use this to filter messages.

Receivers can remove messages on read or after processing. Multiples receivers can be used to distribute the workload.

Doing this can allow you to scale different parts of your app as needed.


## Part 9 - Host and manage services

You could even use a service just like any other type.

### Concurrency

Concurrency and instancing is generally chosen up-front and defined in code rather than configuration.

You can set this with:

`[ServiceBehaviour(ConcurrencyMode=ConcurrencyMode.Single)]`

This could be one of:

* `ConcurrencyMode.Single` - one blocking operation
* `ConcurrencyMode.Multiple` - multiple operations on threads
* `ConcurrencyMode.Reentrant` - one request that can call other services

Similarly, you can set instancing which sets the number of instances of a service that are created:

`[ServiceBehaviour(InstanceContextMode=InstanceContextMode.Single)]`

This could be one of:

* `InstanceCOntextMode.Single` - one per client
* `InstanceCOntextMode.PerSession` - default. one or more per client
* `InstanceCOntextMode.PerCall` - one or more per request

### Service hosts

You can use the `ServiceHost` class or IIS - it's important to carefully consider.

**self-hosting** is one option which is simple and makes it easy to switch to other hosting mechanisms, change bindings or move a host app from machine or location. It also makes debugging easier.

The disadvantages include the need for debugging it yourself and testing, supporting it and upgrading hardware and implementing load balancing. It also requires more work if the machine goes down.

Self hosting is good for peer-to-peer apps.

**Managed windows services** are similar to other .net apps but can run without a logged in user. This has all the benefits as self hosted but with added control about starting stopping and pausing the service.

It is also supported by all versions of windows. The disadvantages include the need to write the `ServiceHost` class. and the limited ability to scale.

**IIS** is another option. It is uaully installed and has features such as app pools, process cycling etc. It can run behind a firewall and load balancer. It's good for high volume requests.

The downsides include the likelihood of it being targeted for attacks and the limited bindings it supports (http).

**WAS** windows activation service is good, not dependant on IIS and allows other message transfer types. But it is not as well known as WAS.