# Chapter 3

Designing and implementing WCF services

## Part 1

Create a WCF service

### Thought experiment

1. When using methods in a WCF service that you don't want publicly exposed you make them private methods, and importantly omit the `OperationContract` attribute, preferably from the interface than the implementation.

2. You could handle enumeration types with `EnumMember` and complex types with `DataMember` attributes.

3. Exceptions can be handled with the `FaultContract` and decorated with further attributes to handle extra information - `FaultMessage`, `FaultCode`.

### Quiz

* 1.D You could use a `FaultContract(IndexOutOfRangeException)` attribute for range exceptions in a WCF service.
* 2.A/C WCF services must have an interface and either interface or implementation must have `ServiceContract`/`OperationContract` attributes.
* 3.A/B to add a new service, you could add it to the interface and decorate it with `OperationContract`.


## Part 2

Configure WCF services by using configuration settings

### Thought experiment

1. If there is a lot of growth expected, it could be the case that code will need to change to accomodate this, however it would still be preferrable to stick to configuration files to manage changes as much as possible because they can be changed without needing to redeploy the service.

2.  You could configure bindings that would be most used such as httpBinding or httpsBinding.

### Quiz

1.A/D To configure a new service you must specify the service and contract.
2.A/B/C/D All aspects of a service can be handled through configuration
3.D It is not possible to add new method definitions in configuration files.


## Part 3

Configure WCF services

### Thought experiment

1. Generally it is best to use a configuration based approach even when the requirements of a service are unlikely to change, as it doesn't hinder or stop you from doing anything differently.

2. If you defined everything imperatively it would make it harder to implement changes to the service.

3. If you defined an entire service in configuration it would not hinder development.

### Quiz

* 1.B When using only .net clients, for speed, you would be best served with a BinaryMessageEncodingBindingElement
* 2.D You can't define the `ServiceOperation` on both the implementation and interface
* 3.A/C/D Tcp-, Http- and MTOM- TransportBindingElement(s) are all valid binding elements.


## Part 4

Secure a WCF service

### Thought experiment

1. For secure information, it would be wise to choose both message and transport level security.

2. For less sensetive information, it would still be wise to implement full security.

3. Certificate-based security is a good option at all times.

### Quiz

* 1.B Using a https binding would improve security
* 2.A/B/C In WCF you can implement both message and transport-level security
* 3.A/B/D for a NetTcpBinding with NTLM auth, you need to set the binding, clientCredentialType and a security mode value.


## Part 5

Consume WCF services

### Thought experiment

1. If adding a client on different OS versions, you could use either Svcutil or Add Service Reference as they offer the same options

2. It would be preferable not to support platform-specific features like generics or arrays.

3. Apart from this, it would be good to consider any other platform dependent features.

### Quiz

* 1.B/C/D You could build a client side proxy any of three ways
* 2.B You could use advaced service reference options to support different types
* 3.A/B/C Svcutil validates code, downloads metadata and generates serialisation code.


## Part 6

### Thought experiment

### Quiz


## Part 7

### Thought experiment

### Quiz

## Part 1

### Thought experiment

### Quiz


## Part 8

### Thought experiment

### Quiz