# Chapter 2 - Querying and manipulating data with EntityFramework

## Part 1 - Query/Manipulate data with EF

### Using DbContext

`DbContext` replaces the older `ObjectContext` from EF 5+

#### Querying

You can use LINQ and reference the context:

```
var query = (from acct in context.Accounts
            where acct.AccountAlias == "Primary"
            select acct).FirstOrDefault();
```

#### Updating

You can update an item then call `int context.SaveChanges(item[s])` (returns no. of items updated), or make a new item and Add/Attach it.

Adding an item adds it with an empty `EntityState`, but attaching could have `Unchanged` if added after changes to that item.

If you attach before further changes, the `Update` method would get called.


#### Deleting

First call set to set the type of query to remove, then call remove & `SaveChanges`:

`context.Set<Account>().Remove(query);`

### Deferred execution

A good solution to impedance mismatch (the difference between relational SQL and OOP C#) is an ORM. EF is Microsoft's ORM.

There might be too much data in a DB to read - LINQ & EF allow *deferred execution*, essentially lazy-loading of data.

For instance, no data will be called until the foreach loop:

```
var query = from acct in Context.Accounts
            where acct.AccountAlias == "Primary"
            select acct;

foreach (var currentAccount in query)
{
    Console.WriteLine("Current Account Alias: {0}", currentAccount.AccountAlias);
}
```

While here, no data is retrieved:

```
EntityFrameworkSamplesEntities context = new EntityFrameworkSamplesEntities();
var query = (from acct in context.Accounts
            where acct.AccountAlias == "Primary"
            select acct).Count();
```

### Implementing lazy/eager loading

* In lazy loading, data is called when needed. Ie, on a join, one table is called but the second can be deferred until required.
* In eager loading, everything is called immediately, similar to a DataAdapter or DataSet.
* You can use explicit loading via the `Load` extension to execute queires individually.

Lazy loading can lead to more round-trips so better when you don't know how much data is needed.

Explicit loading requires fewer trips so better when you know exactly the data required.

You can turn on/off via the designer properties window (`Lazy Loading Enabled`), which modifies the `.edmx` file. You can also do it via code and the `context.Configuration.LazyLoadingEnabled` boolean flag.

You can use `.FirstOrDefault()` to bypass deferred execution. There are also other greedy ops:

* ToList, ToArray, ToDictionary
* An aggregate function (Average, Count, Max).

If calling both the aggregate function and looping, just call tolist/array/dictionary first then Count on that to avoid two DB roundtrips.

### Compiled queries

You can improve performance with a cached **compiled query** (done automatically since .net 4.5), but can be done manually for improved performance.

```
static readonly Func<MyObjectContext, string, Person>  compiledQuery = CompiledQuery.Compile<MyObjectContext, string, Person>(
        (ctx, email) => (from p in ctx.People
        where p.EmailAddress == email
        select p).FirstOrDefault());

Person p = compiledQuery.Invoke(context, "foo@bar");
```

### Entity SQL

Entity SQL is string based and similar to SQL, but with knowledge of the model.

```
var queryString =   "SELECT VALUE p " +
                    "FROM MyEntities.People AS p " +
                    "WHERE p.FirstName='John'";

ObjectQuery<Person> people = context.CreateQuery<Person>(queryString);
```

You can also use the Entity SQL to stream raw data.


## Part 2 - Query & manipulate data using data provider for E.F.

**Very likely to appear on the exam**

### Querying w/Connection, DataReader & Command

`System.Data.EntityClient` is for EF data access, a connection & command is required for reading with a variable to hold the info.

#### EntityConnection

There are various connections - `SqlConnection`, `OracleConnection`, etc. Here `EntityConnection` can be used with no params or a connection string: `new EntityConnection(connectionString);`.

This can be built from another connection provider (ie, SqlConnection), and requires a MetaData property to be set.

#### EntityCommand

Works the same as other commands. Has:

* `CreateParameter` - for parameterised queries
* `ExecuteNonQuery` - executes CUD command, has `ExecuteNonQueryAsync`
* `ExecuteReader` - executes query, returns `EntityDataReader`
* `ExecuteScalar` - as above, for scalars, also: `ExecuteScalarAsync`

You can also use an **EntityTransaction** (or just the regular `System.Transactions.TransactionScope`).

### Sync & async ops

Async ops work the same as synchronous ones and have a `CancellationToken` property.

### Managing transactions

Per E.F., there are:

* `DbTransaction` - part of `IDbTransaction`, store the returned `DbTransaction` for `Commit` and `Rollback` methods
* `TransactionScope` - Call `Complete()`, then `SaveChanges()` and on failure, nothing happens - no need to rollback.


## Part 3 - Query data by using LINQ to Entities

LINQ and EF complement each other.

## Querying w/Linq operators

With LINQ to entities, items derive from `ObjectContext`. 

For LINQ, you need an object that implements `IQueryable` or `IEnumerable` (`ObjectContext` implements `IQueryable`).

A linq query has:

1. Obtain Data
2. Create query
3. Execute query

While LINQ to entities has:

1. An `ObjectQuery` is instantiated
2. Query created
3. Converted to standard LINQ operator/Expression Tree 
4. Execute query
5. Return results

A sample query could look like:

```
IQueryable<Account> query = from acct in Context.Accounts
where acct.AccountAlias == "Primary"
select acct; 

or

select acct.CreatedDate; 

or

select new {
	CreatedDate = acct.CreatedDate,
	AccountAlias = acct.AccountAlias
}
```

### IEnumerable vs. IQueryable

`IEnumerable` are used in LINQ-to-Objects/LINQ-to-XML, performed **in-memory** and **on-the-heap**.

`IQueryable` are run **out-of-process**, support different datasources and are used in LINQ-to-EF/LINQ-to-DataServices.

### Logging queries

You can log a query by turning it into a string (and using the query from before):

```
(LinqToEntities/ObjectQuery):

string Tracer = (query as ObjectQuery).ToTraceString();

(or, with DbContext):

string Output = (from Acct in ContextName.ContextSet select Acct).ToString();
```


## Part 4 - Query and manipulate data using ADO.net

ADO.net has been around for a while so is *battle-tested*.

### Querying data w/Connection, DataReader, Command, DataAdapter, DataSet

These all implement an interface and a variety have varying implementations (ie, Connection is implemented in SqlConnection, OleDbClient), though DataSet doesn't have a provider-specific implementation.

The exam focuses on MS technologies (SqlClient, SqlCommand, etc).

### SqlConnection

You can specify a named connection or use a connection string inline. Eg:

```
using (SqlConnection connection = new SqlConnection("ConnectionStringName"))
{
    connection.Open();
}
```

**Best practice** is to wrap connections in a `using` block or a `try..catch..finally/try..finally` block.

### SqlCommand

Needs a `SqlConnection` and `CommandText`, though by specifying a `CommandType.StoredProcedure`, you an just pass the stored proc name.

Never concatenate inputs - use `SqlParameter` and include it in the `SqlCommand.Parameters` collection; wrap the SqlCommand in a using block or call `sqlCommand.Dispose()` to clean up.

SqlCommand can be used for a SqlDataAdapter/SelectCommand or the method `ExecuteScalar`/`ExecuteReader` can be used. These have `Begin...` counterparts for asynchronous calls.

### SqlDataReader

A forward-only cursor - from a sqlcommand.ExecuteReader / .BeginExecuteReader (async). `.HasRows` lets you know if any data was returned, but there's no way of knowing how many without iterating.

### SqlDataAdapter

Populate a DataSet with as many DataTables as queries, these can be read any way and concurrent `INSERT` commands will be reflected in the returned data. You can immediately `.Count` the results.

They can be used with typed or untyped sets.

**Data object lifecycle** - you can call `Fill` to populate the `DataAdapter`.

**Untyped DataSets/DataTables` - on calling fill, the adapter connects to the database, executes the command and creates DataTable(s).

**DataColumns** are built up from the SELECT query, similarly aliased columns are numberd (ie, `SELECT nf, nf, vf` becomes `nf1, nf2, vf).

You can also call `AddWithKey` to add the primary key/integrity constraints.

**Changes**: you can just use the DataAdapter to SELECT data but you must track changes; if you use a DataTable, the `DataRowState` tracks changes.

```
using (SqlConnection sqlConnection = new SqlConnection("ConnectionStringName"))
{
    using (SqlCommand sqlCommand = new SqlCommand("SELECT * FROM Transactions WHERE id = @ID", sqlConnection))
    {
        sqlCommand.Parameters.AddWithValue("@ID", "IDValue");
        using (SqlDataAdapter sqlAdapter = new SqlDataAdapter(sqlCommand)
        {
            DataSet currentSet = new DataSet("CurrentSet");

            //To trigger update calls for the update method below:
            sqlAdapter.AcceptChangesDuringFill = false;

            sqlAdapter.Fill(currentSet);
            sqlAdapter.Update(currentSet);
        }
    }
}
```

**Typed DataSets/DataTables** follow the same process, but the DataAdapter isn't responsible for creating tables/columns.

The choice of which to use affects where exceptions would occur (on data retrieval, or data access).

SqlDataAdapter has many useful methods:

* AcceptChangesDuringFill - all rows will be returned with a RowState of added
* AcceptChangesDuringUpdate - doesn't update RowState on succesful update
* UpdateBatchSize - number of rows to update in one round-trip
* OnRowUpdating/OnRowUpdated - events to provide feedback
* ContinueUpdateOnError - ronsil
* FillSchema - builds out a schema according to the SELECT command

The SqlAdapter can use all of: `SelectCommand`, `InsertCommand`, `UpdateCommand`, `DeleteCommand`, depending on the CRUD operations required.

**A primary key is usually required for a successful Update operation**

**SqlDataAdapter** can open/close connections for you, but if you manually open it you must close it.

### Sync/Async operations

All async operations start `.Begin...`:

Synchronous                   | Asynchronous
------------------------------|-----------------------
`SqlCommand.ExecuteReader`    | `SqlCommand.BeginExecuteReader`
`SqlCommand.ExecuteXmlReader` | `SqlCommand.BeginExecuteXmlReader`
`SqlCommand.ExecuteNonQuery`  | `SqlCommand.BeginExecuteNonQuery`

To use, you need an `IAsyncResult` and you wait until asyncResult.IsCompleted`

```
IAsyncResult sqlResult sqlCommand.BeginExecuteReader(CommandBehavior.CloseConnection);
while (!sqlResult.IsCompleted)
{
    //Wait or do something else
}
using (SqlDataReader sqlReader = sqlCommand.EndExecuteReader(Result))
{
    // You have the reader, use it!
}
```

### Managing transactions

You can use transactions for an all-or-nothing update (`Commit`/`Rollback`) or a take-what-I-can and do something with failed updates.

`TransactionScope` supports `DataAdapter.Update`, `DbContext` and `ObjectContext.SaveChanges`,


## Part 5 - Create an Entity Framework data model (EDM)

A thorough guide to all EDM features.

### Structuring the EDM w/Table-per-type and Table-per-hierarch

These are the two main inheritance mechanisms for an EDM

With **table-per-type**, the conceptual model is modified - a separate DB table is used to maintain data for non-inherited and key properties in the hierarchy.

Here, data is not stored redundantly and is stored in structured *third-normal-form*. Adding/removing an entity is done by adding/deleting the DB table.

But, there is a performance hit and DB-admin is harder because of the extra tables.

with **table-per-hierarchy**, one table is used for each item in the inheritance hierarchy.

Here, there are fewer tables and faster performance.

But, there is more redundant data, possible data-integrity issues and increased complexity.

### Choosing code first vs. model first vs. DB first

You can create from a DB, via code or with a model designer.

From the designer work-surface, you can change

* Base Class Library type
* Nullable
* Get/Set accessor visibility levels
* Autogenerated value for field w/Default Value
* Concurrency Mode (set to fixed to ensure no changes by other users).

You can also change entity base-types (inheritance).

### Implementing POCOs

When using POCOs:

* The entity type must match the POCO name
* Each entity property must map to a public POCO property
* The type names and properties must match (ie, int -> int, not MyType -> string).

Remove the `CustomTool` property to stop EF auto-generating models.

POCO models are very similar to the EF models.

### DbContext

You can decorate the classes with the table attribute:

```
[Table("Account")]
public class Account{}

[Table("Customers")]
public class Customers{}

[Table("TransactionDetails")]
public class TransactionDetail{}

[Table("Transactions")]
public class Transaction{}
```

This requires `ScalarProperty` and `NavigationProperty` defined.

```
public partial class EntityFrameworkSamplesEntitiesDb : DbContext
{
	public EntityFrameworkSamplesEntitiesDb(): base("name=EntityFrameworkSamplesEntities1") {}
	public DbSet<Account> Accounts { get; set; }
	public DbSet<Customer> Customers { get; 
}
```

### ObjectContext

Using object context is similar, but

1. You inherit from `ObjectContext`
2. Properties are typed as `ObjectSet`
3. You must initialise properties with the `new ObjectSet<POCOName>()` constructor

### Describing a data model

...using conceptual schema definitions, storage schema definitions and mapping language (CSDL, SSDL & MSL).

**There were three files, now rolled into one .edmx file**

**CSDL** - conceptual schema definition language - the object part, describes the entities, relationships & functions

**SSDL** - storage schema definition language - information about the underlying data store

**MSL** - mapping specification language - extra files make this up and it serves as the map between the CSDL and the SSDL.


