# Chapter 2

Querying and manipulating data with EntityFramework

## Part 1

Query/Manipulate data with EF

### Thought experiment

1. For a structure with a parent, five related children one of which with two grandchildren, it may be preferrable to lazy load the data, but the ultimate decision is going to rest on the size of that data compared to the number of possible roundtrips.

**correct, can be validated with logging and tracing**

2. If you pull back all the data, you have space considerations to take into account.

**correct, though you also have network throughput to consider**

3. If you lazy-load the data, you have network latency to consider.

**correct, though you also need to think about the device's ability**

4. The best approach will be determined by the level of knowledge about what you will do with the data - if a known number of queries will be required, then it could be better to load all at once, but if an unknown number, it could be better to lazy-load.

**correct, again logging and tracing will help and ultimately the total size of the data also should be taken into consideration**

### Quiz

* 1.C FirstOrDefault causes a query to be executed **//correct**
* 2.A/B If you try to add an entity that already exists, it is made if there is no key violation else it errors **//correct**
* 3.D If you attach an entity to a context with an existing entity, it is updated. **C - there isn't an operation because it already exists**


## Part 2

Query & manipulate data using data provider for E.F.

### Thought experiment

1.  Using EntityProviders would help a transition from ADO.NET to EF.

**correct**

2. The decision to move all code to EF could improve maintainability and future proof the solution.

**correct, though existing skillsets and the current working state of the code should also be considered**

3. Operations that are likely to be long-running are good candidates for asynchronous methods.

**correct, though it can make things harder to debug**

### Quiz

* 1.C ExecuteReaderAsync is for async operations **//correct**
* 2.C/D You could use a transaction to mitigate problems from an overloaded DB **//just D - in c the transaction would need to be established on connection**
* 3.A/C Entity & SqlTransactions allow you to set a transaction scope. **//A/B - C would work but not in this context - B  transaction scope is needed**


## Part 3

Query data by using LINQ to Entities

### Thought experiment

1. You could diagnose the source of a problem with queries by tracing the query and logging the time taken by the server and in the database.

**correct**

2. You could implement more logging and other features such as asynchronous methods for long running operations.

**You could use lazy-loading, caching and stored procs (which would help with caching)**

### Quiz

* 1.B/D You could use IQueryable and ObjectContext (which returns IQueryable) for a LINQ to EDM query. **//correct**
* 2.A/B IEnumerable and IQueryable need to be implemented for something to be queried by LINQ **//correct**

**Note - the solutions referred to question 2 as #3, while #2 was a phantom question about wrapping the operation in a TransactionScope**

## Part 4

Query and manipulate data using ADO.net

### Thought experiment

1. One way to check whether there is a data leak related to open connections is to use inspecting tool to view open connections. You could also inspect the code to check connections are closed by wrapping in `using` statements or `try...catch...finally` statements.

**If using adapters, it is more likely local caching causing the issue**

2. To speed things up in a slow application, you could profile the application and find out where the long-running methods are taking place or other intensive operations and focus on optimising those parts.

**There could be a wide range of causes such as overuse of data-adapters, unecessary roundtrips for aggregation and counting. You might try temporarily disabling constraints**

### Quiz

* 1. B/C/D you could use a SqlAdapter or the SqlDataReader/ExecuteScalar to run a COUNT command **//correct**
* 2.A SqlConnection objects should be opened as late as possible and closed as early as possible **//correct**
* 3.C With a compiled query, the SQL translation is cached. **//correct**


## Part 5

Create an Entity Framework data model

### Thought experiment

1. When moving a huge set of legacy code to EF, you could use entities to enable easier building of models. You could use the from-database designer to simplify much of the process.

**It depends on what you're already using - if you already have POCOs, you could continue but if you have DataSets/DataTables, you could just move to entities.**

2. You could use EF to populate the existing business object and the could simplify development, leaving in place code that is known to work.

**Depends on the size, for smaller projects this is good but for bigger projects just changing the plumbing could be a waste**

### Quiz

* 1.A/B/C/D the SSDL, MSL & CSDL are all components of the EDM and are stored in the .edmx file **//correct**
* 2.A/B in EF5+, the .ssdl and .msl files are consolidated into the .edmx file **//correct**
* 3.C you can use the entity data model wizard to validate models in an ADO.net app **//A/B - EdmGen.exe and ADO.net model designer**