# Chapter 2

Changes and additions to 70-487

## Part 1

Query/Manipulate data with EF

### Async operations in EF

You can use the `context.SaveChangesAsync()` to asynchronously save changes.

You can use an await in a linq statement:

```
var blogs = await (from b in db.Blogs
                    orderby b.Name
                    select b).ToListAsync()

```

This must happen in an `async` method.

### Mapping stored procs

You can map stored procedures via the entity designer.

Use the **mapping details** > **select insert function**

You can use this to map entity types to the stores proc.


## Part 2

Query & manipulate data using data provider for E.F.

### Configure a DataProvider in Code

Only for EF v.6 onwards, you can configure the data provider in code with `System.Data.Entity.Config.DbConfiguration`. It is recommended to only build one `DbConfiguration` class and to place it in the same assembly as the `DbContext` class.

The `DbConfiguration` should have a public, parameterless constructor and config options should be set by calling methods within the constructor. For example:

```
using System.Data.Entity;
using System.Data.Entity.Infrastructure;
using System.Data.Entity.SqlServer;

namespace MyNamespace
{
    public class MyConfiguration : DbConfiguration
    {
        public MyConfiguration()
        {
            SetExecutionStrategy("System.Data.SqlClient", () => new SqlAzureExecutionStrategy());
            SetDefaultConnectionFactory(new LocalDbConnectionFactory("v11.0"));
        }
    }
}
```

Alternatively you can set the config on a context class per:

```
[DbConfigurationType(typeof(MyDbConfiguration))]
public class MyContextContext : DbContext {}
```
or

```
[DbConfigurationType("MyNamespace.MyDbConfiguration, MyAssembly")]
public class MyContextContext : DbContext {}
```

## Part 3

Query data by using LINQ to Entities

### Log queries and DB commands

For logging, you can use the `DbContext` logging class: `context.Database.Log = Console.Write`.

You can log all types of commands, with timestamps, parameters, relationships, etc.

You can write custom loggers and log to different places (file, DB, etc).

The logging is built around low-level interception.

### Implement async queries

We can implement async queries with the `async...await` pattern:

```
public async static Task<List<Customer>> SelectAllAsync()
{
  NorthwindEntities db=new NorthwindEntities();
  var query = from c in db.Customers
              orderby c.CustomerID ascending
              select c;
  return await query.ToListAsync();
}
```

Here, we use the `.ToListAsync()` asynchronous method to return data, with the `await` keyword.

We can also use:

```
Customer obj = await query.SingleOrDefaultAsync();

await db.SaveChangesAsync();

Customer existing = await db.Customers.FindAsync(id);
```

The async versions of the same calls, used in conjunctino with `await` allow for asynchronous calls.


## Part 5

Create an Entity Framework data model

### Describe a data model w/Custom Code First Conventions