# Chapter 5

Deploying web application services

## Part 2

Choosing a deployment strategy

### Deploy apps using Azure Web Site

You can deploy with FTP, Kudu (via Git/Dropbox etc) or Web Deploy.

You can manually copy files to Azure via an FTP client such as FileZilla.

You can also deploy by syncing with a cloud folder such as OneDrive.

You can also continuously deploy such as with Github, enabling version rollback.

Using the aforementioned Kudu engine, you can also deploy from a local git. Via the Azure portal.

Finally you can deploy from Visual Studio (or other IDEs like Xcode, Eclipse, Azure SDK).

There are also command line tools like MSBuild or Powershell that can be used to automate deployment.


## Part 3

Configure a web application for deployment

### Configure WCF endpoints (inc. HTTPS protocol binding)

You can enable it by creating or installing a certificate in IIS, and adding a relevant binding to a site in IIS. When using a WCF service, you can require SSL on a virtual directory or app.

You also need to ensure the config file has the relevant secure binding:

```
<bindings>
      <basicHttpBinding>
        <binding name="secureHttpBinding">
          <security mode="Transport">
            <transport clientCredentialType="None"/>
          </security>
        </binding>
      </basicHttpBinding>
    </bindings>
```

and

```
<services>
      <service name="MySecureWCFService.Service1">
        <endpoint address=""
                  binding="basicHttpBinding"
                  bindingConfiguration="secureHttpBinding"
                  contract="MySecureWCFService.IService1"/>
        <endpoint address="mex"
                  binding="mexHttpsBinding"
                  contract="IMetadataExchange" />
      </service>
    </services>
```

### Enable and monitor ASP.net app suspend

You can enable app suspend from the config section of an app in the IIS app pool. Set the **Idle time-out action** to suspend.

You can monitor the suspension from the windows event log viewer.

Suspending an app keeps it in memory but restricts access to CPU while after it is idle for a specified amount of time. This allows faster startup and more apps on one box. Good for a shared hosting environment.


## Part 5

Create, configure and publish a web package

### Configure deployment

You can include and exclude extra files from a deployment with the targets section of the .csproj file which is used by MSBuild.

You can exclude items from the package with `ExcludeFromPackageFiles`:

```
<ItemGroup>
  <ExcludeFromPackageFiles Include="Sample.Debug.xml">
    <FromTarget>Project</FromTarget>
  </ExcludeFromPackageFiles>
</ItemGroup>

```

The following command defines a target:

```
<PropertyGroup>
  <CopyAllFilesToSingleFolderForPackageDependsOn>
    CustomCollectFiles;
    $(CopyAllFilesToSingleFolderForPackageDependsOn);
  </CopyAllFilesToSingleFolderForPackageDependsOn>
</PropertyGroup>
```

The following command adds files to the previous target:

```
<Target Name="CustomCollectFiles">
  <ItemGroup>
    <_CustomFiles Include="..\Extra Files\**\*" />
    <FilesForPackagingFromProject  Include="%(_CustomFiles.Identity)">
      <DestinationRelativePath>Extra Files\%(RecursiveDir)%(Filename)%(Extension)</DestinationRelativePath>
    </FilesForPackagingFromProject>
  </ItemGroup>
</Target>
```

## Part 6

Share assemblies between multiple applications and servers

### (modified) Configure assembly binding redirects [ie, from MVC 4 to MVC 5]

In .net 4.5.1+, binding redirects are automatically added. You can disable this or manually enable it if needed for older versions of .net apps.
