# Chapter 3 :: Access & Secure Data

A focus on validating user data and external data

## HTML5 Input Elements

New to HTML5 are input elements such as `color`, a colour picker, `date` & `datetime` for dates/datetimes, `month`, `week`,
`time`, `range`, `tel`, `url` as well as support for the usual `Radio`, `Checkbox`, `Password`, `Button`, `Submit` and `Reset`.

Text allows for single lines of text while textarea is a multiline control. An `input type='text'` and `textarea` cover these.

Text input can have `maxLength` set to restrict the number of characters that can be entered.

Setting the type to `url` causes the input to be validated as a url. The `pattern` attribute and JavaScript can also be used.

Password gives a password box with input glyphed out. It's not possible to write to it with JavaScript.

Email allows for validation as an email.

The `input type='checkbox'` allows for checkboxes and can have the `checked` attribute set.

The radio control must have the same name for different items to work together and unique IDs. The checked attribute is the same here.

The range input can have a min, max and value.

Anything can be a button with the onmousedown/onmouseup events but in forms there are a few specific ones.

`submit` posts data, `reset` clears form fields. The `button` input can have a value to show text on it and needs to be wired up to work.

There's also the button element which doesn't have any preset text but can be `type='submit'`, etc... and can contain html fragments.

### Additional attributes

The `readonly` attribute stops users from interacting with elements. `spellcheck='true'` allows spellchecking.

The text input can have a pattern validator: `pattern='^[a-zA-Z0-9\-\.]+\.(com|co\.uk)$'` for emails for instance.

The placeholder shows 'example' data and a `required` attribute forces the user to use a control to submit the form.


## Part 2: JavaScript Input validation

JavaScript can use regular expressions for validation as per the `pattern` input attribute.

Some regex tokens:

* `\w` - alphanumeric + underscore (_)
* `?` - optional modifier
* [^A] - not 'A' (caret means not)
* + - one or more
* * - zero or mor§e
* ^ - Beginning of a string
* $ - end of a string

In JavaScript, a regex object can be made with: `var regexObjext = /^[ABE][DEF]?$/;`

This would be tested with `regexObjext.test("Some string")` //false for the above regex

The regex object can also return an array of matches with `regexObjext.exec(string)`

The string object also exposes `search` and `match` methods that return the index of the first match found and the matching subsection respectively

The regex check can be used on data consumed (JSON, XML etc) to prevent crashes or alerts.

### Other functions

`isNan()` can be used to check for non-numeric values or `isFinite()` for numeric (and finite) values

Don't use `eval`. Ever.

Iframes can be insecure, the `sandbox` attribute can be used with an empty string to prevent abuse.

Other iframe-sandbox attributes include `allow-same-origin`, `allow-top-navigation`, `allow-forms` and `allow-scripts`


## Part 3 - Consuming Data with Javascript

Javascript has the `XMLHttpRequest` object to consume data.

Methods include:

* `Onreadystatechange`
* `ontimeout`
* `Abort`
* `getAllResponseHeaders`
* `getResponseHeader`
* `send`
* `setRequestHeader`
* `Open`

and properties include:

* `readyState`
* `Response`
* `responseBody`
* `responseText`
* `responseType`
* `responseXML`
* `status`
* `statusText`
* `timeout`
* `withCredentials`

An example of calling data with the object could look like:

```
var request = new XMLHttpRequest();
request.open("GET", "someUrl.xml", false);
request.timeout = 2000 //Default is 0, no timeout
request.send(null);
var response = request.response;
```

The request.send method can have the following options:

`req.send(Method, URL, async, userName, passWord);`

**The username and password are only ever transmitted in response to a 401 response, never in the .send or .open methods**

The ready-state value for completion is 4


## Part 4 - Data serialisation

Changing the data to and from a form in which it can be more easily sent/read

JSON data can be serialised with `JSON.stringify` and de-serialised with `JSON.parse`

A blob (ie, image) can be sent directly with `xmlRequestObject.send(blobVar)`, but needs to be de-serialised with `URL.createObjectURL(data)`

The jQuery `$form.submit(...)` function can be used to override regular form processing (ie, for custom validation). `return false` prevents regular submission.

The serialize function (as in `$(this).serialize()`) can be used to grab all form elements into a string. It is encoded automatically.

**The serialize method only works where all inputs have `name` attributes**

**For radio-boxes, the value attribute must also be set to know which one was chosen**

