# Review

Chapter 4 - Troubleshooting & debugging

## Part 1

Tracing & debugging

### Thought experiment

1. In .net, there are performance monitors and tracing tools which can help prevent data corruption.

2. To diagnose data corruption, you can use log4net or NLog.

### Quiz

* 1.D Tracing calls to view timed method entry/exits can be useful for debugging a failed web service request.
* 2.B/C/D Code contracts can help remediate problems with bad data in an application.
* 3.A/B Health monitoring and generic logging can be added to an existing application.


## Part 2

Exception handling

### Thought experiment

1. When building an application for support staff, you could treat error handling as an extra tool for the end user.

2. With the same application, you might want to expose as much technical information as possible through the error handlers. This could be good as they are more likely to understand the information being exposed.

### Quiz

* 1.B In a business application with potential data-layer issues you don't want to show end users, a generic business-layer handler would be appropriate for passing information to the UI.
* 2.C first chance exceptions allow you to handle errors before they've been processed by any other handlers.
* 3.B web.config error handling is set from the customErrors node.


## Part 3

Test a web app

### Thought experiment

1. To add testing support to an application with significant business logic changes, you could start by writing unit tests in a TDD approach to document the expected behaviour of the application.

2. As unit tests are interested in functionality of code, you could write them before the business rules are fully realised, but this is very unwise.

### Quiz

* 1.D When creating unit tests you should aim to test every method used.
* 2.C To test an application against real-world loading, a good choice is a stepped load test
* 3.C To test an application against a known number of users to gauge server requirements, goal-based load testing is a good approach.


## Part 4



### Thought experiment

### Quiz
