# Chapter 1 - Design the application architecture

## Part 1 - Plan the application layers

An application is one or more related features, these are built up in *layers* of code.

MVC (model-view-controller) is about seperating different bits of the architecture - SoC (seperation of concerns).

* **Model** is business logic
* **View** is what a user sees
* **Controller** is the code that manages the two

### Planning data access

Data is key to designing an app. You can access it with an ORM (object relational mapper) or by rolling your own code.

The three main methods of developing the database are:

* **Model-first**, by using visual modelling & design tools
* **Code-first**, by building POCO (plain old CLR objects) from which a generator builds the db
* **Database-first**, by directly writing a schema. Best for updates/updgrades

If using entity framework to manage the DB access, extra code needs to be added - either in the controller or as an extra layer.

The **repository pattern** is a fancy way of talking about this abstraction and is a way of improving unit testing by further seperating the DB from the code.

### Planning seperation of concerns

Seperate parts of an application that have different purposes - the data models from the presentation of the data.

MVC has the added complexity of JavaScript run client-side.

**Loose coupling** means parts can operate independently of each other, leading to more stable code.

ASP.NET MVC has a lot of conventions that come into play - folder, file & class/method naming schemes (ie, SomethingController C# file).

### Models

Handles the business logic, manages data access, located in the `models` folder (or, a seperate assembly, for easier sharing)

Often made in the controller and passed to the view.

There are three main type of model:

* **Domain** model, in the case of an entity framework Model
* **View** model, in the case of all the data being sent to a view
* **Input** model, in the case of the user's input, as modelled

Model binders can collate this information into the model


### Controllers

Controllers handle the business logic of an application.

Users interact with the application by calling URL paths which are mapped to actions.

The controller takes the request, calls the relevant model and binds the data to response.

The user's interactions are based on **Action methods** which map methods to URLs/interactions

 Consider the data model and the user's work when building the controllers.

 Controllers have **actions** and **action results**

 The **actions** are the methods called by a URL, the **actionresults** are the views passed back to the client

 **actionResults** can also return JSON or binary data.

 Some actions may be taken automatically by the system like a JS `timeout` that calls a method

 The `Global.asax` file has a routing table.

 The default format is `controller/action/id`, which sends id as a param to action method of the controllerController

 Actions can be *decorated* with attributes such as `[HttpOnly]` or `[ValidateInput]`.

**Asynchronous** methods can be made with the **Task** framework from `System.Threading.Tasks`.

Asynchronous controllers are useful for tasks which require long-running IO or network activities (CPU intensive things don't make that much of a difference).

To make an async method, mark it as `async` and return a `Task<ActionResult>` as per:

```
public async Task<ActionResult> ExampleFunc()
{
	ViewBag.SyncOrAsync = "Asynchronous";

	...
	network intensive operation
	...

	return PartialView("partialViewName", results);
}
```

### Views

Views get data in a `ViewBag` (a `ViewDataDictionary`).

There are **strongly-typed views**, **ViewModels**, **Partial Views**, **Master/layout pages**, **Scaffold templates**

A layout may have common design inside which a view sits, optionally with one or more nested partial views.

**Razor** is the default view engine, with the **@** delimiter.

Anything other than basic coding should be done in a controller.

The view engine can be extended and overridden.

**Inline code should only be about displaying information, not modifying/processing it**

Client side vs. server side processing: where does the work take place? What needs to change? Think about performance and latency. Eg. Client side validation to decrease server calls and improve performance for all users.

**Scaling** can be done:

* Horizontally (with lots of servers), or
* Vertically (with higher-power servers)

Scaling horizontally requires you to think about how shared resources are accessed and about caching plans.

Scaling vertically requires more thought about the efficiency of the app, and has a single point of failure.

Database scalability is another decision - hosting different DBs on different machines and using different types of DB


## Part 2 - Distributed apps

Web apps are already distributed across a client and server, possibly a separate DB server and multiple CD servers.

Some ways of distributing an app are by running services to manage data/underlying business layers.

In MVC, these can be accessed (and exposed) as old-school .asmx web services, last-gen WCF or with the latest ASP.NET 4.0 Web API such as with a REST URL.

In MVC4, the webAPI has a controller, `ApiController` which handles the serialisation (such as to/from XML/JSON) of the data for us.

There are both positives and cons to the distributed model - while opting for services can add redundancy and enable further separation of layers, it can add other problems such as firewalls, connectivity and network lag.

### Hybrid applications

Applications can be spread between an internal company server and cloud servers (such as Azure). This might be useful for protecting sensitive data or extending capacity when needed.

The two main approaches are a client- and system- centric approach. In the first, the client calls the service when needed, in the second service requests are distributed by a third party (eg. AppFabric).

In the hybrid approach, you need to think about dropped connections, latency, authorisation and code accordingly.

You also need to think about concurrency and consistency.

### Session management

Sessions are tracked with a `SessionId` cookie or querystring. ASP.NET MVC has access to all ASP.NET session code, but is designed to be stateless and pass all required model data with each request.

Session is harder on distributed systems because of the different moving parts, or 'can be unreliable with a service bus'. A query string or hidden input can help.

IIS has three types of session management:

* **InProc**, in the server's memory - good performance, not clusterable.
* **StateServer**, with a seperate stateserver (connection string required).
* **SQLServer**, as above, but with a subsequent SQL call to store/manage the session.

### Web Farms

The classic load-balancer/multi-server setup, high availability and good redundancy. Horizontal scaling.

Session can be managed across servers with the **SessionMode OutProc** setting.


## Part 3 - Azure Application Lifecycle

Azure is PaaS (web services/containers) and IaaS (virtual machines).

Azure has three roles, which are:

* the web role - for apps run in IIS
* the worker role - for other web apps
* the VM role - for more complicated apps

Web and worker roles can have **startup** tasks, to install a component or set a registry key.

The `ServiceDefinition.csdef` file has a `Task` element which is where startup tasks are set.
These can be batch files that get called and take environmental vars and write output to file.

Startup tasks run on recycle/reboot and need to exit with 0 for startup to continue.

Roles start, run synchronous (simple) tasks one by one and set up background/foreground asynchrounous tasks
and call `Microsoft.WindowsAzure.ServieRuntime.RoleEntryPoint .OnStart / .Run`.

`AppCmd.exe` is used to manage IIS settings, such as:

* Site
* App
* VDir
* Apppool
* Config
* Backup
* WP - worker process admin
* Request - active http request display
* Module - module admin
* Trace - trace log admin

You can manage settings in the registry instead of filesystem - for speed & security (in case of malicious FS access). No registry settings are persisted.

`OnStart` is different to a **startup task**, the startup task can have a different privilege level, and can run
asynchronously as a background/foreground role, but the `OnStart` and `Run` methods can share state.

To add functionality to the `OnStart` method, you can override the handler in code.

The same can be done for the `Run` method, but it must block as a return indicates that the process is done.

You can also run init code in `Application_Start`, but this runs after `OnStart`.

After this, you can run cleanup code in `OnStop`, but this is limited to 5mins to ensure shutdown happens.

## Part 4 - State management

HTML is stateless so we must manage state in code. The decision of how depends on the setup (ie, if there are multiple servers).

Stateless connections mean a server can handle many more clients. Web forms posts a `ViewState` to track state.

In ASP.NET MVC, you can store data in the:

* Cache - on-server memory pool, shared by all users
* Session - on-server, unique to each user
* Cookies - client, unique
* QueryString - passed in the URL
* Context.Items (HttpContext - lasts request lifetime).
* Profile (in DB, cross-session state).

Cache is a key-value store. In a web farm, check the value is on your server before using.

You can make your own Session provider by inheriting `SessionStateStoreProvider` (ie, if you need to store session in an oracle DB). Set the Session State feature to allow this.

With cookies (stored in `HttpContext.Request.Cookies` for reading or `HttpContext.Response.Cookies` for write), the size can affect request time as the whole cookie is always sent.

The query string data can be also be read from HttpContext: `HttpContext.Requst.QueryString["attributeName"]`. Never send confidential data this way as it can be read even over HTTPS.

Context.Items is only available during that request but could be useful for authentication (it's available to later modules).

Profile as accessed via `HttpContext.Profile["miscData"]` requires a membership provider to be set up in the *Web.config* file.

If state is for display only, you can improve performance by maintaining it separately on the client. The design needs thought for example, in Google docs, multiple users can save changes to a document, but if it is in the client, then it won't be kept up to date with itself.

You might store application status in the Cache.

Size of data is important. A small-mid size form could be stored in cookies. The query string could be used for searches; data is always exposed and this could be useful. The session can't store lots of information but could be setup as a key to a DB entry.

### Scalability

MVC is good for scalability, but thought must be given to how state will be managed. Options include:

* OutProc
* StateSever
* SQLServer session
* Sessionless

In a web farm, all servers must use the same state server/sql server. In sessionless, the state must be stored in the client (cookies/local storage) or on the server (piggybacking the HTTP authorisation header for instance).

**Cookies** can only store 4kb of data and aren't useful if data will only be used client-side. They are good if the same data needs to be used by different requests (ie, shopping cart info). You could make a base class for all models to inherit that includes that data.

Other info like "Remember me" could be used to store this.

**Web Storage** in HTML5 as `sessionStorage` or `localStorage`. Local storage is cross-tab and allows events to be attached. Data is client-side and needs to be syndicated to the server manually.

The `System.Web` section, `<sessionState>` node of the **Web.Config** file allows you to set the session storage modes, either InProc, Session Server SQL Server, etc. Here you can also set the membership provider.

A membership provider can be configured with `<provider>`.

Configuration in the **Machine.Config** affects all websites on the server.

**Sessionless** can be useful where parallel AJAX calls need to be procesed; session causes blocking pocessing of requests in the order they're sent.

You can maintain state in sessionless mode with a unique identifier passed in requests, or a hidden form field. Or, with JavaScript in localStorage/sessionStorage and by passing when needed.

The value could also be in the master layout or query string/url.

**ASP.NET added stateless to match HTTP which is stateless, sending info with the URL or QueryString is insecure.**

