# Review

Chapter 1: Design the application architecture

## Part 1

Plan the application layers

### Thought experiment

Implementing a government website:

1. To maintain the look and feel of a website across a new application, the site's existing design (HTML/CSS) could be retained by keeping the stylesheets and porting the HTML to the main layout and the views.

2. To enable real-time access to the data, the submitted forms could be passed into a database and exposed via a read-only view, optionally with secure access and a 'latest' feed/listing.

3. You could create and manage a separate business layer for this with entity framework or a custom class, to manage the data.

### Quiz

* 1.A When dealing with data from a third party provider, you could design a model to handle that data and create an asynchronous partial view to retrieve the data.
* 2.C To implement a dashboard page with combined data, it would be best to create a model for the summary data, handling the requests and merging of data in the model.
* 3.C/D When upgrading a legacy system with developers unfamiliar with OOP patterns, you could opt for a model-first or database-first schema design process.
* 4.C When designing a system with a high likelihood of system changes, you could implement the repository pattern, with the old system as one such repository and the new system(s) as subsequent repositories, when they become available.

## Part 2

Distributed apps

### Thought experiment

A geographically distributed application:

1. Software in different regions could set up services such as REST services with an WebAPI to expose local data in those regions as JSON/XML that could be consumed and provided to users via a central app.

2. The primary concerns of an ASP.NET MVC app that would consume such disparate sources of data would be security, consistency, concurrency and availability. It would need to handle some regions 'going down' and user authentication.

3. The benefit of adding AppFabric would be that it provides a service bus that could help distribute the service requests automatically.

### Quiz

* 1.B/C a REST URL with XML could be exposed with the WebAPI ApiController, or by serialising the data manually in an MVC4 project.
* 2.B Traditionally consuming an ASMX web service would require adding a service reference.
* 3.C/D Hybrid apps are such where part of the solution is cloud based and part is hosted locally.


## Part 3

Azure Lifecycle

### Thought experiment

1. If you wanted to run an orphaned data check, this could go in the `Run` handler.

2. These processes could go into a worker role as they would be unlikely to use IIS.

3. Assuming the processes were all C# console processes, migrating them to the cloud should be fine. The infrastructure is set up to enable them to run fine as console apps.

### Quiz

* 1.B If an unhandled error is raised during startup, the startup is cancelled
* 2.A/C/D AppCmd.exe lets you work with Site, Config and App objects, amongst others
* 3.A/B/D the `Run` method could be used to run services in parallel, to send messages, check website availability or manage a logging application.


## Part 4

Sessions & State

### Thought experiment

1/2. To set up servers to for reliability, safety & performance when serving hundreds of daily users, they should be set up with a load balancer and run with session managed by SQL Server, three servers hosting, one managing state and one managing data input/output from the application.

3. If two servers went down, the third would still be able to handle the traffic; active sessions may be lost but the load balanacer would re-route traffic to the third server. The application could also be written to save to localStorage in case of non-response from the servers.

### Quiz

* 1.D when using an Oracle DB for persistence, session configuration must be written into a custom session provider
* 2.A/B/D when attempting to access state information client side it could be stored in localStorage, as a QueryString or with cookies
* 3.A/D in sessionless mode, an application must manage access to the state management mode and the identifier used on the server for the request.


## Part 5

Caching

### Thought experiment

1. You could improve performance in an application with a high number of calls to static data by implementing data-caching on a user-by-user basis; implementing a CacheProvider class to cache calls to a data layer.

2. Caching could improve speed in an application that queries large amounts of data from the database by only returning changed data and by not calling for data at all, though in an application that is calling for uneeded data, a stored procedure or improved query could also be used that only returns the required data.

### Quiz

* 1.B/D in an application with few users on a poor connection, Application caching and HTTP caching could provide the best improvement to page load time.
* 2.B in an application with a few items of static content, donut-hole caching could be used.
* 3.A/C when users request similar data at the same time, data caching or page-output caching with a four-hour time out could improve perceived speed.


## Part 6

### Thought experiment

### Quiz


## Part 7

### Thought experiment

### Quiz


