# Chapter 2 - Program Flow

Program flow means presenting functions in a proper order. This can mean:

* Conditional flow (if...then)
* Iterative flow (for...each)
* Behaviour flow (onclick)

and... **exception handling**


## Part 1 - Implement flow

`if...else`, `switch...case` and `ternary (?, :)` operators

Must be able to use evaluation operators (`>`, `!=`, etc).

Don't forget about the `==` which doesn't check for data-type equality and `===` which does (as per `!=`/`!==`).

Control statements can be nested.

The logical or is a shortcutting operator.

Switch-case statments - don't forget the `break` and don't use expressions within `case`s

**Arrays** can be created with the `var xyz = new Array([variable|size])` command or with the array literal `[]`.
Arrays are dynamic and will resize appropriately if an out-of-bounds value is set.

We can initialise multi-dimensional arrays by initialising each member of an array to an array as in `arrayVar[0] = new Array(5)`

**Array properties**

* Length: `[1, 2, 3, 4].length === 4` 

**Array Methods**

* concat: `[1, 2, 3].concat([4, 5]) === [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]` -> new array returned
* indexOf - index of a value and starting offset: `"hello".indexOf("l", 0) === 2`
* lastIndexOf - as indexOf, but searches from end: `"hello".lastIndexOf("l", 4) === 3`
* join - joins an array with a seperator: `[1,2,3].join(":") === "1:2:3"`
* reverse - reverses an array: `[1,2,3].reverse() === [3,2,1]` -> **array reversed in-situ**
* sort - sorts an array: `[3,2,5,4,1].sort() === [1,2,3,4,5]` -> **array sorted in-situ**
* slice - returns elements from an array: `['a', 'b', 'c'].slice(0,2) === ['a', 'b']` -> new array returned
* splice - removes elements from an array and optionally replaces with others: `['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'].splice(0, 2, 'e') === ['e', 'c', 'd']` -> **array spliced in-situ**

*Important to remember where array methods affect the array object and where they return new objects*


### Special types of arrays

Queues and stacks can be implemented directly with the `Array` object

* push: `[1, 2].push(3, 4) === [1, 2, 3, 4]` -> **array mutated in-situ**
* pop: `var a = [1, 2, 3], b = a.pop() :: a == [1, 2], b == 3` -> **array mutated in-situ**

Shift and unshift work the same but remove/append to the beginning of arrays:

* shift: `[1, 2, 3].shift() === 1 :: array is now [2, 3]` -> **array mutated in-situ**
* unshift: `[2, 3].unshift(1) === [1, 2, 3]` -> **array mutated in-situ**

This can be used to implement a stack or queue.
Eg.1: Stack (FILO)

```
var stack = new Array();
stack.unshift("First");
stack.unshift("Second");
stack.shift() //"Second"
stack.shift() //"First"
```

Eg.2: Queue (FIFO)
 
```
var queue = new Array();
queue.push("First");
queue.push("Second");
queue.shift() //First
queue.shift() //Second
```

 ### Advanced Array Methods

 * every - do all array values meet criteria
	* `var lessThanFive = [1, 2, 3].every(function(x){ return x < 5 }); //true`
	* second var possible - optional reference to array
* some - as per every, but for checks if at least one element passes condition
* forEach - runs logic for each value in an array
	* `[1, 2, 3].forEach(function(val, index, arr) { console.log(val) })`
	* parameters passed to callback are: `value`, `index` and `array`
* filter - returns an array of values that pass the filter condition
	* `[1, 2, 3].filter(function(val, index, arr) {return val > 1}) === [2, 3]`
* map - applies a function to all values of an array, similar to forEach but **returns the array**
	* `[1, 2, 3].map(function(v, i, a) {return v * v}) === [1, 4, 9]`
* reduce/reduceRight - just like a regular fold/foldl, folds an array and takes an optional start value
	* `[1, 2, 3].reduce(function(prev, curr) { prev.push(curr); prev.push(curr); return prev; }, [])`
	* reduceRight is the same, starting from the right


### Implementing iterative flow control

The for loop can iterate a number of times `for(counter; condition; counter increment) {}`, nothing special

The `for..in` loop can iterate over properties of an array/object, by name. The variable provided is the property name:

```
var items = { "book": "1984", "car": "Rolls", "day": "Sunday" }
for (var prop in items) {
	console.log(prop)			//book
	console.log(items[prop])	//1984
}
```

The `while` loop and `do..while` loop are both similar to for, but the condition must be modified within the loop.

Be careful about blocking the main thread.

`break` and `continue` break out of the current (not parent) loop and move to the next loop iteration respectively.


## Part 2 - Raise & handle events

Browsers trigger events based on user interactions. Examples include `onblur`, `onclick`, `onmouseover`, etc.

These event handlers are referred to as *event listeners* and can be added by:

1. Declaring them in the HTML markup `<div onclick="javascript:function()...`
2. Assign the function to the event property of the object `el.onclick = function()...`
3. Use the add/remove methods of the object to associate the event `el.addEventListener("click", function()...`

### The event object

The `event` object is common to all events and contains details about the event, like which button was pressed in an `onclick`

The event object is accessed through the window object: `var eventObject = window.event`

*in other browsers the event object is passed to the event handler*

When hooking up event to DOM objects, the objects must have been instantiated. It is common to put such code in the window.onload handler as the DOM will be complete by this point.

The third way to add events is with the `object.addEventListener(<event name>, <event function> [, <cascade rule>])` function (and the sister `object.removeEventListener()` function).

The cascade rule handles event bubbling.

The handlers are named with a similar schema to the event name in the addEventListener method.

event name | event
---------- | -------
click      | onclick
load       | onload
mouseover  | onmouseover
blur       | onblur
focus      | onfocus
focusin    | onfocusin
focusout   | onfocusout


Events are called in the order that they're added


### Anonymous functions

It's not possible to identify and subsequently remove anonymous functions passed to event handlers. However named functions can be removed later.

Anonymous functions can be used anywhere and can be assigned to variables and passed around.

When a function returns false, it stops further processing of the event. `return false;` and `window.event.returnValue = false;` can both be used.

This can be used to cancel a default onclick event on an anchor tag, for instance by returning false from the event handler.


### Event bubbling

As per **Listing-1**, events can bubble up through the dom - a click on one div can then pass to another div's click handler

In the listing, clicking the inner div will cause it to be handled first and the outer one last. To reverse this, the `addEventListener`'s optional `cascade rule` can be set to true.

`element.addEventListener("click", functionName, true);` <- now the event will **cascade** instead of **bubbling**.

To cancel the event bubbling, the `window.event.cancelBubble` property can be set to `true`.

The **change** event occurs when the value of an element (ie, an `input`) changes.

In an event handler, the `this` variable is bound to the calling object.

Other input events include `focus` and `blur` when an element receives and loses focus, respectively.

There are also keyboard events:

1. `keyup`
2. `keydown`
3. `keypress`

Here, the `window.event` object contains useful properties: `altKey`, `keyCode`, `ctrlKey` and `shiftKey`.

For some keys, such as the arrows, **only** `keydown` is fired.

Mouse events include `click`, `mouseenter` and `mouseleave`, among others. Their window.event object has properties such as:

* `clientX/Y` - where relative to the viewport the event ocurred
* `offsetX/Y` - where relative to the element the event happened
* `screenX/Y` - where on the screen the event happened

There are also `drag` events such as `drag`, `drop`, `dragstart`.. etc.

In the drag `window.event` object, there is a `.dataTransfer` method to store values:

`window.event.dataTransfer.setData("keyName", "dataValue");`

Some elements don't support default drag-and-drop functionality. `event.returnValue = false` cancels their default event.

### Custom events

Custom events can also be instantiated (with the `window.customEvent` object).

```
myEvent = new CustomEvent("anAction", {
    detail: {
        description: "a description of the event",
        timeofevent: new Date(),
        eventcode: 2
    },
    bubbles: true,
    cancelable: true
});

//A handler can be added to this event
document.addEventListener("anAction", someFunction);

//The event can be called with dispatchEvent
document.dispatchEvent("anAction");

//The handler can refer to even properties
function someFunction(e) {
	console.log(window.event.detail.description)
}
```

*Internet explorer might not support this at the moment*


## Expception handling

Defensive programming - check for `null` values.

Javascript has `try..catch..finally` - use it to handle errors 'gracefully'.

The `exception` object has the following properties: `message`, `number` & `name`.

```
try {
	//Some methods
}
catch(e) {
	//error handling
}
finally {
	//Cleanup code - always runs
}
```

To access a variable in all blocks, it must be scoped above the block.

`console.log` is a good way to report errors during development. F12/devtools will give access to this.

Exceptions bubble up the call stack until they find a catch block or the browsers handles it.

Exceptions can be `throw`n manually. The `Error` object constructor takes an error number and a message.

`throw new Error(12, "My custom error message");`

null checks are often important to ensure expected program flow. An attempt to perform a math operation on a null value results in `NaN`, not a number.


## Part 3: Callbacks

Callbacks can be used in asynchronous code:

```
window.onload = function() {
    WillCallBackWhenDone(MyCallBack, 3, 3);
}

function WillCallBackWhenDone(f, a, b) {
    var r = a * b;
    f(r);
}

function MyCallBack(result) {
    alert(result);
}
```

Callbacks were used in the arrays section and are common in events (the handler).

Websockets allow bi-directional communication. The websocket object exposes various methods:

```
new WebSocket('ws://studygroup.70480.com', ['soap', 'xmpp']);

webSocket.readyState == WebSocket.OPEN
webSocket.send(data)
webSocket.onmessage = function(msg)
```

Other websocket statuses include `CONNECTING`, `CLOSING` and `CLOSED`.

jQuery is useful as it is specialised to manipulating the DOM and Ajax is good for dynamica page updates.

Using jQuery, you can simplify ajax calls with `$.ajax`, `$.get` and `$.post`.

The ajax call takes an object containing the url, cache value, dataType, success callback and an error callback.

The success callback gets the returned data while the error gets: `xHttpRequest`, `errorText` and `errorNumber`

You can post data by specifying a `type: "POST"` in the object.

jQuery simplifies interacting with the dom - many elements can be assigned at once. `$(td).click(function()...)`

jQuery allows you to use regular css selectors

In javascript, functions are objects and first-class citizens.

An anonymous function can be written just the same as a named function, but without the name.

Callback functions are often anonymous. They can take parameters and be passed around as variables.


### The `this` pointer

With jQuery, `this` within a selector callback provides a reference to the object or collection of objects referenced.

```
$("#submitButton").click(function(){
	$(this).attr("display", "none"); //<-- this refers to the #submitButton
})
```


## Part 5 - Web Worker Processes

Web workers allow you to schedule some tasks asynchronously

A web worker is created with the webWorker object:

```
var webWorker = new Worker(<sourceFile.js>);

webWorker.postMessage(data) //start the process
webWorker.terminate()		//stops the process
webWorker.onmessage(EventData(data)) //callback for the processed data
webWOrker.onerror()			//an error callback - message, filename, lineno
```

The limitations of this are that the postMessage data must be at string - functions can't be passed

Workers are also expensive resources - if we need many, build a pool to use.

Workers can't access the DOM. They can also make their own 'sub-workers'

We could use `setTimeout` to run a worker after a delay, or `setInterval` to repeatedly call the worker with the `worker.postMessage(data)` method.

