# Review

Thought experiments and quizzes


## Part 1

Program flow

### Thought experiment

1. A `for` loop is better than a `while` loop when iterating over object properties such as a dictionary or an array

2. The readability of code is affected by the incrementing code being shown alongside the loop condition.

**//lots of other reasons suggested too, such as the kind of problem, knowing the number of loops in advance, etc.**

### Quiz

* C. `for` provides iterative flow control **//correct**
* A. join and D. concat are both methods to combine arrays **//join is not correct, concat is**
* C. `do..while` will ensure that a loop is run at least once **//correct**
* B. `break` can be used to exit a loop **//correct**


## Part 2

All about events

### Thought experiment
To change fields in a form when other fields are changed, the onchange event could be used.
Alternatively for text inputs, onkeypress could be used.
Another alternative would be the onblur event which would ensure the user has finished interacting with the element,
but could lead to UI problems if elements update while they already have focus.

**//answer more geared towards the general mechanics of the business logic than the technical implementation**

### Quiz

* B. CSS is not a valid method of setting events **//correct**
* B. Anonymous functions *do not* have a clearly defined name **//correct**
* A. `window.event.returnValue = false` would cancel an event (as would B. `return false;`). **//A is correct, b is not**
* D. mouseleave occurs when a DOM element receives mouse focus (but not on the element receiving focus). **//A. the focus event fires when an element receives focus**
* A. dragstart, drag, dragenter, drop is the correct order of events for a drag action


## Part 3

Exceptions & null values

### Thought experiment

In a longer Javascript routing with multiple points of failure, then specific parts of code that could have
problems can be wrapped in `try..catch` blocks.

Sections that can't fail can then use the catch sections to re-throw the errors which will
then bubble up the call stack.

If the errors aren't breaking, then an error can be logged instead.

**//Nesting try..catch blocks was the focus**

### Quiz

* A. Proper code handling allows flow to continue & provide user feedback **//correct**
* D. name isn't a property of the error object **//description was the answer, B.**
* A. Checking for null prevents using uninitialised variables **//correct**


## Part 4

Ajax, jQuery & events

### Thought experiment

I would use WebSockets to implement a bi-directional chat application.
This is because WebSockets is a lighter-weight protocol.
WebSockets also allows for constant listening and 'push' updates of messages, while ajax calls would have to be
repeated at regular intervals.

**//totally correct**

### Quiz

* C. a web socket objects must have a `wss` url in the path parameter **//correct**
* C. The web socket event raised is `.onmessage`, when data is received **//correct**
* B. url, cache, datatype and success are required for an ajax call **//C. url, datatype and onsuccess**
* A. jQuery is an easier method for dom selection because it allows you to choose many elements at once **//correct**


## Part 5

Web workers

### Thought experiment

A large firwork show on a web page could be too resource intensive as lots of particle effects may be needed.
I would use a canvas and set a regular interval to animate the frame with `.requestAnimFrame`. If webWorkers were
used then attention would need to be payed to how many resources are being used.

If fireworks each had their own individual methods, then webWorkers could lead to a more fluid display but potentially at the cost of performance.

**//the user interface could be uninterupted by running the animations on a separate thread**

### Quiz

* C. close is not a valid webWorker operation **//correct**
* B. terminate cancels a webWorker **//correct**
* C. webWorker code must be placed in it's own file **//correct**
* C. A limitless number of webWorkers can be run concurrently **//correct**
* D. to have a script run continuously, use setInterval with a time in milliseconds **//correct**