# Chapter 2 - Design the user experience

## Part 1 - Apply the UI design

Stylesheets in a directory can be bundled directly by calling `@Styles.Render("~/css")` in Razor.

Engine | Master layout  | Location
---------------------------------------
Razor  | _Layout.cshtml | Views\Shared\
ASPX   | Site.Master    | Views\Shared\

Both engines inherit `System.Web.Mvc.ViewMasterPage` in the base template.

With CSS you can change the design, call fonts with `@font-face`

`<header>` and `<footer>` elements also good fit for the master template.

Remember the HTML5 elements:

* article
* aside
* figure
* figcaption
* nav
* section

Older browsers don't support HTML5 fully if at all.

Sometimes it is better to do tasks in the browser, like sorting lists, this saves server load and a round-trip for the data.

**HTML Helpers** help make html snippets:

`@Html.ActionLink("Help", "Help")`

* `BeginForm` Creates a starting <form> tag
* `EndForm` Creates an ending <form> tag
* `TextArea` Creates an HTML <textarea> input
* `TextBox` Creates an HTML input box with a type of text
* `CheckBox` Creates an HTML check box
* `RadioButton` Creates an HTML radio button
* `ListBox` Creates an HTML list box

These helpers are in `System.Web.Mvc.Html`

These helpers can take parameters, models and other data such as placeholders:

`@Html.TextBoxFor(m = m.FirstName, new {@Placeholder = "First Name"})`


## Part 2 - UI Behaviour

jQuery popular and a need-to-know; AJAX is an important extension.

**Validation** can be done both client- and server-side.

Buiness logic and the data model control this. Client-side validation can lead to less uneeded data-transfer.

Data annotations on a model control validation - min/max length (useful for DB columns of fixed length), required, REGEX, etc.

**Views** get model validations and show up errors immediately. Great for performance.

`@Html.EditorFor(m => m.Prop)` and `@Html.ValidationMessageFor(m => m.Prop)` allow for validation and input of model properties

**Controllers** can use the very important `Model.IsValid` property to check for valid data, only saving when it is good.

### Remote validation

For example, checking if a username exists - this requires a remote server check.

A JsonResult action can be used for custom validation as per the following example:

```
public JsonResult IsUserAvailable(string username)
{
 if (!WebSecurity.UserExists(username))
 {
 return Json(true, JsonRequestBehavior.AllowGet);
 }
 string suggestedUID = String.Format(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture,
 "{0} is not available.", username);
 for (int i = 1; i < 100; i++)
 {
 string altCandidate = username + i.ToString();
 if (!WebSecurity.UserExists(altCandidate))
 {
 suggestedUID = String.Format(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture,
 "{0} is not available. Try {1}.", username, altCandidate);
 break;
 }
 }
 return Json(suggestedUID, JsonRequestBehavior.AllowGet);
}
```

The returned value includes JsonRequestBehaviour.AllowGet to negate further client side validation if the name is accepted.

To use, the model needs `System.Web.Mvc.RemoteAttribute` and the data annotation references the controller/action:

`[Remote("IsUserAvailable", "Validation")]

The web.config also needs to have the following lines set:

```
<appSettings>
 <add key="ClientValidationEnabled" value="true" />
 <add key="UnobtrusiveJavaScriptEnabled" value="true" />
</appSettings>
```

**Javascript** can be used to modify the DOM. It can change object values, colours, styles, classes, etc.

Prototypes are objects and a `new` object has a link to it's prototype; it's a shallow copy. If a value doesn't exist in a child, the prototype chain is searched for the next object with a corresponding value for that property.

Prototyping can be used to save memory as only one instance of a method/property is needed. See the following example:

```
var Contact = function(pageTitle) {
 this.pageTitle = pageTitle;
 this.bindEvents(); // binding events as soon as the object is instantiated
 this.additionalEvents(); // additional events such as DOM manipulation etc
};
var Contact.prototype.bindEvents = function() {
 $('ul.menu').on('click', 'li.email, $.proxy(this.toggleEmail, this));
 };
var Contact.prototype.toggleEmail = function(e) {
 //toggle the email feature on the page
 );
```

**AJAX** is great for partial page-updates. For example, the typeahead search feature.

AJAX is great for dynamic/changing data, not static data. It is bad for data that needs to be indexed by search engines.

The BeginForm can be turned into an ajax function:

`@using (Ajax.BeginForm("PerformAction", new AjaxOptions { OnSuccess = "OnSuccess", OnFailure = "OnFailure" }))`

The **OnSuccess/OnFailure** functions are JS methods on the page.

**jQuery** is great for cross-browser support and has plugins such as **jQueryUI** for many features such as tabs with $("el").tabs().

There is also a good animation library.

UI can appear to be more responsive by pre-loading images in the background using the jQuery `load` function.


## Part 3 - UI Layout

**Partial views** allow reuse of elements of a website.

A model can be attached to any view with `@model viewNamespace.viewName` and a partial can be put into a view with `@Html.Partial("partialName")`.

If the partial view and it's parent view have different models, extra work needs to be done.

### Razor templates

There are a couple of different types of templates such as `EditorFor` which is an **EditorTemplate**. This can use custom model fields (only defined for base types like string) when the type has a custom **EditorTemplate**.

Eg:

```
@Html.EditorFor(m => m.Article)

@model ApplicationNameSpace.Article
@if (Model != null) {
 @Html.TextBox("", Model.Title)
 @Html.TextBox("", Model.Body)
}
else
{
 @Html.TextBox("", string.Empty)
 @Html.TextBox("",string.Empty)
}
 ```

Editor templates must be in a specific folder:

* ~/Views/ControllerName/EditorTemplates/TemplateName.cshtml
* ~/Views/Shared/EditorTemplates/TemplateName.chstml

Display templates likewise:

* ~/Views/ControllerName/DisplayTemplates/TemplateName.cshtml
* ~/Views/Shared/DisplayTemplates/TemplateName.chstml

A page can be seperated into different section, referenced through partials and Actions.

`RenderBody()` can be called from a master page to insert child-views into it. Scripts & styles are usually loaded in the master page.

Master pages can be changed programatically with:

```
if(ViewBag.Switch == "LayoutXYZ")
{
    Layout = "~/Views/Special/_XYZ.cshtml";
}
else
{
    Layout = "~/Views/Shared/_Layout.cshtml";
}
```

