# Review

Chapter 2 - Design the UI

## Part 1

Apply the UI

### Thought Experiment

1. With a music website portal, sections of the website could be made dynamic and personalised for each user by using partial views for those section, serving different content for that view, depending on the user.

2. Knowing that a significant portion of the visitors don't have HTML5 compliant browsers would lead to advising the design not to include HTML5 elements such as `<section>`, `<header>` and `<nav>`, where possible.

### Quiz

* 1.A/C Any parts of the design that will appear on every page are a good candidate for including in the master template.
* 2.C to design a consistent interface, common elements should have the same style.
* 3.B/D dynamically pulling in information from a database and customising the interface to for different users are good reasons to switch to dynamic web content


## Part 2

Design the UI behaviour

### Thought Experiment

1. Validation via annotation attribuates on the data-model could stop a user from entering incorrect dates, when paired with an `EditorFor` and `ValidationMessageFor` html helpers. Regex validation coud be used to ensure a date is entered.

2. Information could be preloaded for display with the jQuery `load` function. This will ensure a snappy responsive UI.

3. When querying for a product, part of the screen could be updated with an AJAX call.

### Quiz

* 1.C Contains both the text box and validation message HTML helpers
* 2.B It is possible to use AJAX to make regular async calls to the server for info as well as for saving objects from the client
* 3.A/B/D any system where there could be restrictions on types, required fields or field lengths are good candidates for validation.


## Part 3

Compose the UI

### Thought Experiment

1. To enable staff to switch screens, you could implement a shared master view, with a menu system listing the different views. Changing views would then only entail clicking the relative link.

2. Quick login/out functionality could be achieved by adding a partial view with the login/out buttons to the master view. That view could include an inline form for logging in or a button to log-out, depending on the current application state.

### Quiz

* 1.B The `@Html.Partial()` helper is used to render a partial view
* 2.D If the input box has a size attribute, a `@Html.TextBox` control may have been used
* 3.B To set the layout to a different master page, use the `Layout = "~/Path/To/Master"` command


## Part 4

Feature detection/progressive enhancement

### Thought Experiment

1. To ensure iPad users and Surface Tablet users can both effectively use the same application, you could use a mixture of stylesheets, browser-agent-specific views and progressive enhancement with Modernizr to style an application and ensure compatibility of scripting by using a cross-browser library such as jQuery.

2. If you needed to provide different functionality based on the device, you could use browser-agent sniffing in the frontend and the backend to provide different code and different views.

3. By making features device-dependent, you could run into issues with compatibility, ease of access for staff using different devices and potential application usability problems if not architected correctly.

### Quiz

* 1.B/C/E The prefixes -ms, -moz and -o will support microsoft, firefox and opera browsers
* 2.A/D user-agent sniffing and the DisplayMode provider are both ways of detecting the browser type.
* 3.B The DisplayModeProvider can be implemented to allow an application to look for different views


## Part 5

Adaptive UI

### Thought Experiment

### Quiz
