# Chapter 3 - Develop the UX

A good UX can make a website feel responsive, snappy and reduce clicks required. It's just as important as UI.

## Part 1 - SEO and Accessibility

SEO affects a page's rank on search engines. SEO has to do with content and structure - the structure also affects the accessibility of a site.

AJAX/jQuery can hide content - WAI-ARIA (web accessibility initiative - accessible rich internet applications) is a set of practices to help.

There are tools to check the HTML - The SEO toolkit under IIS, for instance. It can inform on broken links, missing tags or alt-properties, etc.

There are also Bing and Google webmaster tools. The W3C has stylesheet and HTML validators, which don't specifically look for SEO items but can help.

There is also the Page Inspector in Visual Studio.

Seperation of concerns also improves accessibility by having less to parse.

**Browser Developer Tools** are usefule when analysing the site structure and can be used to modify CSS, check for empty tags etc.

**WAI-ARIA** is good but increases payload size and not every browser supports it. Aria has:

* `aria-xyz` values such as `aria-pressed`
* `role="button"` and similar

There are also *landmark roles* such as:

* application
* button
* form
* main
* navigation

Some match HTML5 elements (like `<main>`). You can also build html-helpers to include aria support.


## Part 2 - Globalisation & localisation (g12n & l10n)

g12n is the process of making an app usable by multiple cultures. It's broken down into l10n and i18n. It consists of translating labels & content, docs, help, etc. It consists of:

1. Translate files
2. Read browser's culture
3. Provide translated files

The server culture is the default.

l10n has language-locale, as in en-GB or en-US, same language different locale.

When making a request, the browser may specify language as part of the headers:

```
GET http://localhost/HTTP/1.1
Connection: keep-alive
Cache-Control: max-age=0
Accept-Language: en-US,en;q=0.8
```

To automatically serve culture-dependent files, you need to add the following line to the **web.Config**:

`<globalization culture="auto" uiculture="auto" enableclientbasedculture="true" />`

The translated text, images & videos are put into *Resource* .xml files which are called via the `ResourceManager` class.

You can also localise individual views, useful for RTL languages like Arabic, or longer languages like German (30% longer on average).

Resource files can also be one-large or many-small ones.

In translating, you can make a dev-file with **@@-** prefixed values to indicate what has been translated. Also, some JavaScript or CSS (`content` attribute) may contain untranslated values.

### JavaScript g12n

Microsoft developed the jQuery plugin `jquery.globalize` to help and `globalize.cultures.js` with 305 translations.

You can check language with: `var language = "@Request.UserLanguages[0]"`

Or set it in jQuery with: `jQuery.preferCulture(lang)` and globally: `$.global.preferCulture(lang)`

It is good to offer users a culture override via a dropdown list and it can be set via:

`Thread.CurrentThread.CurrentUICulture = new CultureInfo("es-MX");`

Resource files that are too big can be split into individual satellite assemblies and compiled from the CLI. They should be named **resource_name.culture_identifier.resource** and can't contain executable code. You then load them into memory when needed with the ResourceManager.


## Part 3 - Controllers & Actions

Controllers manage the user-app interaction, `return`ing actions, they're called by setting routes.

**Attributes** can be added to a controller to handle application flow and there are different types:

1. Filter attributes can filter the request and include:
    * RequireHttps - a call must be HTTPS
    * ValidateAnitForgeryToken - prevent XSS
    * ValidateInput - controls validation
    * Authorize - automatic security
    * ChildActionOnly - can only be called from an action/renderaction
    * HandleError - handles exceptions
2. You can implement your own via the `ActionFilterAttribute` abstract class
    * OnActionExecuting - before the action runs
    * OnActionExecuted - after the action runs
    * OnResultExecuting - before the response is run
    * OnResultExecuted - after the response is run 

Attributes can be set on the **method**, **class** or globally in **App_Start/FilterConfig.cs RegisterGlobalFilters()** per:

`filters.Add(new RequireHttpsAttribute());`

**Order of filters** is important - you might want to block all non-https traffic, so put that first before wasting CPU cycles on other code, to *exit early*.

**Action results** are the response to send back to the client. There are:

Action result         | Helper method | Description
---------------------------------------------------
ContentResult         | Content       | Returns a user-defined content type
EmptyResult           | (None)        | Represents a return value to be used if the action method must return a null result
FileResult            | File          | Returns binary output that is written to the result
JavaScriptResult      | JavaScript    | Returns JavaScript that is executable on the client
JsonResult            | Json          | Returns a serialized JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) object
PartialViewResult     | PartialView   | Renders a partial view; a special view that represents a portion of the finished page
RedirectResult        | Redirect      | Redirects to another action method by using its URL and passing through the routing process
RedirectToRouteResult | RedirectToAction/RedirectToRoute | Redirects to another action method
ViewResult            | View          | Renders a view as an HTML document

ViewResultBase is the most common, the base for ViewResult & PartialViewResult - has a model, view name, master view, view data & temp data.

Content result could be any kind of stream or file. PDF, XML, HTML, etc. It must be encoded as a string.

File result is for binary files, JavaScript for sending scripts and JSON for javascript objects.

RedirectResult is like the `Response.Redirect` and RedirectToRoute redirects to a route in the route table.

**Model binding** is the M in MVC, data can be bound to the model on the page and from form values in request bodies. There are:

* Strongly typed - full support for model validation, data annotations, `Html.TextBoxFor(m => m.Name)`, etc.
* Weakly typed - faster as less overhead, but not as rich support (no client validation), `Html.TextBox("model.Name")`
* Value provider - good when dealing with external HTTP requests.

There are different model binders - *DefaultModelBinder*, *LinqBinaryModelBinder*, *ModelBinderAttribute* and *ModelBinderDictionary*.

In a weakly typed model, you can use the **Bind** attribute: `Public ActionResult Login([Bind(Prefix="login")]LoginUser user)`, useful when the Razor and CS have different names for a field. Another option is **Exclude** and **Include** which do or don't bind certain properties.

**ValueProvider** has: *FormsValueProvider* (for forms data), *QueryStringProvider* for query string data, *HttpFileColectionProvider* for attachments and *RouteDataValueProvider* for routes. Eg:

```
Public ActionResult Save(FormCollection formColl)
{
 Employee emp = new Employee();
 If (TryUpdateModel(emp, formColl.ToValueProvider())
 {
 UpdateModel(emp, formColl.ToValueProvider());
 }
}
```


## Part 4 - Routes

Fundamental to MVC, the mapping of a URL to a controller action.

Friendly URLs are good for SEO as well as the user. An application can handle them easily.

Routes are stored in a `RouteCollection` object, they are added with `RegisterRoutes` in **App_Start/RouteConfig.cs**.

You can pass defaults for information in a route to prevent a 404 being served.

The default pattern is `{controller}/{action}/{id}`. The routing engine will try to match an incoming URL to a controller/action that matches that path. Eg: Account/Edit -> Account controller, Edit method, or Account/Edit/1 -> as before, but Edit method taking a param. (first, an Int, then if not available, a method with a string).

For example:

```
public static void RegisterRoutes(RouteCollection routes)
{
 routes.IgnoreRoute("{resource}.axd/{*pathInfo}");
 routes.MapRoute(
 name: "Default",
 url: "{controller}/{action}/{id}",
 defaults: new { controller = "Home",
 action = "Index", id = UrlParameter.Optional },
 constraints: new { id = @"\d+" }
 );
 }
 ```
You can have multiple parameters that are optional in any order.

Constraints is a regex and UrlParameter.Optional means the id parameter isn't needed. The constraints can be used to pass different requests to different actions (eg, /Product/Details/Car to the index() and /Product/Details/2 to Details() ).

`routes.IgnoreRoute()` can be used to not process certain routes (eg, all .png files). The ignore must be added before other routes or it might not get processed.

**Areas** are sections of an app with different functionality (eg: ShoppingSite, Warehouse). Each can have their own set of MVC components. Each has a XyxAreaRegistration.cs file.

You can link to different areas: `@Html.ActionLink("Product Detail", "Product", "Detail", new { area="ShoppingSite"}, null)`


## Part 5 - Extensibility

Every part of the request and of MVC can be overridden and extended.

Filters can be added to controllers:

1. Authorization - `System.Web.Mvc.IAuthorizationFilter`, custom authorisation for whether an action can run.
2. Action - `System.Web.Mvc.IActionFilter`, a wrapper aronud a method can cancel, provide additional info, inspect data, etc.
3. Result - `System.Web.Mvc.IResultFilter`, a wrapper around the result, can process further
4. Exception - `System.Web.Mvc.IExceptionFilter`, run when an unhandled exception occurs in an action, anywhere even in filters.

Authorisation is good for custom auth, action could be used for standard logging, result could let you do extra work on the view or more logging and the exception filter, to handle custom exceptions.

A filter can have it's own attributes to set whether it can be put on methods, classes or both. You can also add it globally to **RegisterGlobalFilters**.

**Custom Controller Factories** can also be created, such as when dealing with *dependency injection* or *inversion of control* (**DI/IoC**).

To do this, you implement:

`System.Web.Mvc.IControllerFactory` with:

* **CreateController** - constructor code
* **ReleaseController** - clean up code
* **GetControllerSessionBehaviour** - define how the controller interacts with the session

You must also register the controller factory in `Global.asax > Application_Start()`:

`ControllerBuilder.Current.SetControllerFactory(typeof(CustomControllerFactoryName()));`

**ActionResults** can be written too - inherit `System.Web.Mvc.ActionResult` and override `ExecuteResult`.

**View Engines** can be overridden or replaced too (the standard being Razor and ASPX), by inheriting `System.Web.Mvc.VirtualPathProviderViewEngine` or just re-implementing `System.Web.Mvc.IViewEngine` and writing `FindView`, `FindPartialView` and `ReleaseView`.

You could override a view engine to add debug information, or to support more flexible paths.

You must also add view engines in the `Application_Start` with `ViewEngines.Engines.Add(new CustomViewEngine());`.

**Model binders** handle the form-data => model mapping for you. A custom model binder could pull together seperate values (such as the month, date & year) into one DateTime object for the data-model. Again, this would need to be registered in `Application_Start`.

You can also add a model binder for just one class.

**Route handlers** could also be re-implemented. You might need two different-language sites with different URLs (cf. /products/books with /productos/libros). You could inherit `MvcRouteHandler`, and implement `GetHttpHandler`.

When doing this, you would register a route in the table and specify the custom handler:

```
routes.MapRoute(
 "Home",
 "{controller}/{action}",
 new { controller = "Home", action = "Index"
 ).RouteHandler = new MyCustomRouteHandler ();
```

You can also implement `System.Web.Mvc.IHttpRouteHandler`, but have to register calls slightly differently as the `.RouteHandler` is expected to be a `MvcRouteHandler`.


## Part 6 - Reducing bandwidth

There are many ways of reducing bandwidth - from minification & bundling to compression.

**Bundling** allows multiple files to be combined into one file. You can make bundles in `BundlesConfig.cs`, then include them on page with the Razor helper. It handles hashtag (expiration) too.

**Minification** slightly improves performance and can be enabled simply by turning debug off (or in `BundleTable.EnableOptimizations = true`).

**Compressing data** can be done to reduce filesizes and is an IIS setting. For other files, you can also return a `FileResult` or convert it to a `CompressionStream` and return a `ContentResult`.

The `System.IO.Compression.GZipStream` class is useful here, MIME-type would need to be set as a header and IIS configured for GZIP files.

**CDNs** can be used to speed data transfers or offload to a faster network.