# Review

Chapter 3 - Design the UX

## Part 1

SEO & Accessibility

### Thought experiment

1. You could use a variety of tools to detect major errors in your site - the SEO toolkit in IIS is one such example there are also HTML validators from the W3C and a variety of webmasters toolkits.

2. Implementing ARIA in your application would improve your search engine ranking.

3. You can check how different parts of a site download from the Network tab of a Browser's developer tools.

### Quiz

* 1.B Content hidden in JavaScript could hinder a site's SEO performance
* 2.A/B/C The IIS SEO Toolkit, F12 Devtools and Bing Webmaster toolkit could all help investigate an application.
* 3.B/D To estimate time taken to upgrade an application for WAI-ARIA standards you would need to consider HTML helpers and the complexity of the forms.

## Part 2

Globalisation & localisation

### Thought experiment

1. For an application with the same language direction (LTR), it is easiest to maintain different resource files only.

2. Using an AJAX UI might mean some text which needs translating is held in JavaScript. It could be translated with the jquery.globalization plugin.

### Quiz

* 1.A/D Menu images and button tooltips are both candidates for translation
* 2.A The resources manager provides translated strings
* 3.D al.exe is the CLI app for building satellite assemblies.


## Part 3

Controllers & Actions

### Thought experiment

1. In a role-based-permissions site, if you add authorisation with filters, then you might prevent non-logged in users from seeing the same pages. You could still track logged in users such as in the pipeline with a module and present the same views to all users.

2. You could prevent unauthorised users from editing a site by adding Authorization filters with role checks to edit actions in the controller.

3. If you are unable to create new content in a site while logged in, you may have set the wrong filters on the create action in the relevant controller.


### Quiz

* 1.B When authorising and using HTTPS, check the HTTPS first.
* 2.A A fileresult is useful for transmitting binary files.
* 3.D You could use different model binders in different views when supporting mixed types of data.

## Part 4

Routes

### Thought experiment

1. You could modify a sales & customer facing site by seperating each business function into a different area with it's own set of Views/Controllers/Models.

2. If a product is no longer available, you could cause a request to it to be redirected to the main page by adding a default route or optional parameters and using those to redirect the request from the controller action.

3. You can modify the site to display different actionMethods for different URLs by adding extra routes in the routing table.

### Quiz

* 1.B Help/Remote as a route with a controller of "support" and the action "index" would redirect that route to the support index.
* 2.B route.IgnoreRoute can be used to ignore routes
* 3.B/C if a set of controllers are too bloated, you could move them into their own *Area*.


## Part 5

Extensibility

### Thought experiment

1. You could create and test a site theme without taking the site down by writing new css and implementing a filter to only display that theme to users with a certain authorisation level.

2. You could modify a controller's actions with custom IActionFilters to log when that action(s) are executed.

3. If you want to display a specific result set and have already modified a controller to return that data, you could check that the route is not being overridden to display different data.

### Quiz

* 1.D To send an email to logged-in users, you could create an ActionFilter and apply it to the login controller.
* 2.A/B (same) logging data is possible via a globally-applied ActionFilter.
* 3.B/C To store multi-part values consistently, you could apply business logic to the model or create a custom binder.

## Part 6

### Thought experiment

### Quiz
