# Chapter 4 :: CSS3

Styling HTML5 with advanced CSS3

## Part 1 - CSS text properties

Text can be coloured with colour-names, hex or rgb()

font-weight can bold text. Values (100...) or names (bold) cn be used

the font-style can set italics.

`@font-face()` can be used to import other font faces.

```
@font-face {
   font-family: "My Nicer Font";
   src: url('fonts/my_woff_font.eot');
   src: url('fonts/my_woff_font.woff');
}
```

Then the font-family of an element is set to the specified font-family in the font-face declaration.

The font-size can set the pixel, em, rem, percentage or name (small, large...) of a font's size.

The alignement can be set with text-align (left, right, center, justify)

text-indentation sets indentation.

letter-spacing and word-spacing set the spacing on these relative parts of text.

hyphen can be used to set whether breaks are hyphenating `none`, `Auto` or `Manual` (with `&shy;`)

There's also text-drop-shadow.


## Part 2 - Styling boxes

Boxes have `width` and `height` attributes (can be precentages, rem, pixels, etc.)

A `border-style`, `border-color` can be set.

`border-spacing` defines spacing between adjacent elements. Also, `border-width` for thickness.

The `border: 5px solid black;` short-hand can also be used.

The individual borders (top, left, bottom, etc). can be set independently.

Padding & margin are also available as combined, shorthand, individual, separate values.

Opacity allows for transparent elements.

A `background-image: url(...)` can be set with a size, repeat, clip and position.

There are linear gradients and radial gradients.

`background: linear-gradient(black, blue)`

This takes an angle and a series of colour stops.

The `box-shadow` allows for adding a shadow with the following parameters:

* `h-shadow`, `v-shadow` - horizontal/vertical position
* `blur` - optional, defaults to 0, distance of blur
* `spread` - shadow size
* `color`
* `inset` - inside the box?

The shadow position (h- & v-shadow) can be negative values to move the shadow to the top/left of the box.

`Text-shadow` has similar properties to box shadows.

Clipping: `clip: rect(x0, y0, x1, y1)` allows you to hide parts of an element, the element must be `fixed` or `absolute`

**All elements are placed relative to their parents, by default**

We can `position` an element relative to the page `fixed`, it's normal flow `relative` or it's parent `absolute`.

**Left and right measure from the outer edge of a box *including* margins and borders.**

`z-index` allows you to position absolute elements in-front or behind other elements.


## Part 3 - Flexible content

### The flexbox:

with `display: flexbox`, we can organise content with a `flex-direction`:

* `flex-direction` - horizontal or vertical
	* `Column` (and `column-reverse`)
	* `row` (default, or `row-reverse`)
* `flex-pack` - how child elements are organised
	* `End`
	* `Start`
	* `Center`
	* `distribute`

**The flexbox is layed out according to the flex-direction**

Child items can have `flex` set to configure how much space to occupy
and a `flex-order` to position them relative to their siblings

The `flex-wrap` can be set on a flexbox to set how child-items wrap. This can also be set as part of:
`flex-flow: row wrap` in the shorthand.

### Multicolumns

Multiple columns can be set in an element with `column-count`.

* `column-count`
* `column-gap`
* `column-rule-color`
* `column-rule-style`
* `column-rule-width`
* `column-rule`
* `column-span`
* `column-width`

There is also the shorthand `columns`.

`column-span: all` can span a header, for instance, across the whole column set.

`wrap-flow` (or `-ms-wrap-flow` in IE10+) allows more fine floating. Inline siblings can be set to flow `both`,
`start`, `end`, `maximum` and `clear`

There is also a `wrap-margin` to set the margin size on a floated element.

The grid display is simplified with `display: grid` which can be programmed with `grid-column`s and `grid-row`s individually
or together as a shorthand:

`grid-rows: (20%) [5];` or `grid-rows: 20% 20% 20% 20% 20%;`

Then each child is given a `grid-row` and `grid-column` positioning. Additionally, `grid-row-span` and `grid-column-span`
allow the elements to span multiple rows/columns.

`flow-from` and `flow-to` can allow content to span regions.

## 