# Chapter 4 :: CSS3


## Part 1

Styling HTML text

### Thought experiment

An easy way to alter styles based on user input would be to programmatically set the various attributes in the style property
of an element, or better by setting the style on classes and adding/removing those classes.

### Quiz

* B. heavy is not a valid font-weight
* D. justify fills text to the width of it's container
* C. word-spacing lets you configure the space between words


## Part 2

Styling HTML boxes

### Thought experiment

It would be possible to move text in a ticker across the page by setting the text in a div positioned relatively and
positining the text absolutely, then setting the left property of the text in a javascript setInterval to an increasing
value to animate the text.

### Quiz

* D. ft are not a valid css unit of measurement
* A. borders can be set individually but need to conform to the shorthand rules
* B. margin, border, padding is the order from outside to inside of the css box model
* A. positive values of box shadow will draw a shadow to the bottom right
* B. fixed positions an element relative to the browser window


## Part 3

Flexible content layouts

### Thought experiment

The previously mentioned layout could be extended to use the columns module with `column-count` and any additional columns parameters as desired.

### Quiz

* C. grid layout is based on columns and rows
* D. elements in a flexbox cannot be set into rows and columns
* A. both allows elements to wrap both sides of a floated item.


## Part 4

Animating the UI

### Thought experiment

All kinds of effects and animations could be shown by combining CSS transitions.

### Quiz

* b. visibility: hidden hides an element but keeps it in flow
* b. media queries are best suited to displaying different views depending on the viewport width.
* d. ease-in-out starts a transition slow-fast-slow


## Part 5

CSS Selectors in jQuery

### Thought experiment

You can use CSS selectors in jQuery. To style the first paragraph of any group of paragraph elements, you could use
`$("p:first-child");`

### Quiz

* A. `.code` is a css class selector
* C. input[required] is an attribute selector
* D. hover would style an element on mouseover


## Part 6

CSS file structure

### Thought experiment

To change the appearance of the first letter of a first paragraph on hover, you could use `p:first-child:hover:first-letter`

### Quiz

* A. footer p:first-child would target the first <p> child of a footer element.
* B. to style headers with a font and italic for articles, you could use:
```
	h1 {
	 font-family: ‘Courier New’;
	}
	article h1 {
	 font-style:italic;
	}
```
* To add a border, shadow and skew to an aside:
```
	aside {
		border: 1px solid black;
		box-shadow: 5px 5px;
		translate: skew(5deg);
	}
```