# Chapter 4 - Creating and consuming web API based services

## Part 1 - Design a Web API

WebAPI is HTTP so a lot of configuration is already taken care of.

### Choosing appropriate methods

It's important to use the right REST verb and the correct status code.

Methods:

* Delete - delete
* Get - read
* Put - update
* Post - create
* Head - retrieves the message headers
* Patch - update (partial message only identifiers and modified fields are sent)
* Options - request for info about comms options available

With **HttpGet**, you may have a scheme such as the following and you can check inside the method for whether the item exists and throw a HttpResponseException with HttpStatusCode of NotFound if necessary.

`/api/something/key` or `/api/something?attribute=val`

**HttpDelete**: it's a good idea to prefix delete operations for clarity. This could return 200 (OK), 202 (Accepted, pending) or 204 (No response - a void return on the method will cause this).

**HttpPost** is always used to create new items. HTTP 1.1 states you return 201 (created) when creating items but this doesn't happen automatically. You can return a value from a POST method to indicate success.

For example:

```
[HttpPost]
public HttpResponseMessage PostAccount(Account account)
{
 HttpResponseMessage response = Request.CreateResponse<Account>(HttpStatusCode.Created, account);
 string newUri = Url.Link("NamedApi", new { accountId = account.AccountId });
 response.Headers.Location = new Uri(newUri);
 return response;
}
```

**HttpPut** is straightforward, methods can be labelled with `[HttpPut]` and should have Put in the name.

**It's a good idea to put simple parameters in the request route but save complex types for the request body**

>> For the exam, the CRUD **update** is represented by the WebAPI **put**.

### Defining resources with actions

In VisualStudio, you would use the WebAPI project. It is usually a good idea to build the model first.

The model is a regular .net class with public properties. The default constructor must be public.

The controller must inherit `ApiController` and defines the actions/action methods that can be used.

For instance you may have an `AccountController` with a `GetAccounts` class and a `SearchAccounts` class. That respectively return JSON or XML serialised data of the relevant accounts.

When a request doesn't match available data you can return a HttpResponseException with a HttpStatusCode or a HttpResponseMessage.

**Browser functionality/support**: when testing, different browsers will have different behaviour due to sending different headers. For instance, in IE10: `Accept: text/html, application/xhtml+xml, */*`

### Routing

The routing is defined in the routing table which implements `System.Web.Http.Routing.IHttpRouting`.

```
config.Routes.MapHttpRoute(
 name: "DefaultApi",
 routeTemplate: "api/{controller}/{id}",
 defaults: new { id = RouteParameter.Optional }
 );
```

The default WebAPI routing works for **GET**, **POST**, **PUT** and **DELETE**. If using convention, you don't need to decorate a method (ie, with `[HttpPut]`).

**Use `System.Web.Http` for `ApiController` and `System.Web.Mvc` for `MvcController`**.

The `[AcceptVerbs(string[] verbs)]` atrribute allows you to specify multiple verbs for a method.

**ActionName**: you can specify the action in the route: `routeTemplate: "api/{controller}/{action}/{id}"` or in an attribute: `[ActionName("myAction")]`.

You can also specify public methods (which would automatically be exposed as actions) to not be actions with the `[NonAction]` attribute.

**Response formats** depend on the browser's sent headers, though this can be specified if using Ajax. You can serialise the data with different formats using a `MediaTypeFormatter` or `BufferedMediaTypeFormatter`.

### Planning for async

WebAPI calls run on a thread each - so too many queues and long running operations can cause a server slow/melt-down.

__Async calls are a good fit for IO-bound tasks__ (if CPU-bound, say by intensive processing tasks, then there is little to no benefit).

The folllowing illustrates converting a sync method to async:

```
public string Get()
{
 WebClient webClient = new WebClient();
 string result = webClient.DownloadString("http://microsoft.com");
 return result;
}

public async Task<string> Get()
{
 WebClient webClient = new WebClient();
 string result = await webClient.DownloadStringTaskAsync("http://microsoft.com");

 return result;
}
```


## Part 2 - Implement a WebAPI

It is useful to wire up a page with JavaScript to enable communication with the api via Ajax calls.

The HttpRequest header allows you to specify what content is returned via *content negotiation*, valid attributes are:

* Accept
* Accept-Charset
* Accept-Encoding
* Accept-Language

An example request-response might look like this:

```
GET http://localhost:53366/data/Customer/FindCustomers?lastName=r HTTP/1.1
X-Requested-With: XMLHttpRequest
Accept: application/json, text/javascript, */*; q=0.01
Referer: http://localhost:53366/
Accept-Language: en-US,en;q=0.5
Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; MSIE 10.0; Windows NT 6.2; WOW64; Trident/6.0)
Host: localhost:53366
DNT: 1
Connection: Keep-Alive
```

with the server responding:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Cache-Control: no-cache
Pragma: no-cache
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
Expires: -1
Server: Microsoft-IIS/8.0
X-AspNet-Version: 4.0.30319
X-SourceFiles: =?UTF-8?B?QzpcUHJvamVjdHNcTXlTb2x1dGlvblxNeVdlYkFwaVxkYXRhXEN1c3RvbWVyXEZ
pbmRDdXN0b21lcnM=?=
X-Powered-By: ASP.NET
Date: Mon, 15 Jul 2013 15:52:20 GMT
Content-Length: 290
[{"CustomerId":4,"AccountId":2,"FirstName":"Captain","LastName":"America"},
{"CustomerId":8,"AccountId":3,"FirstName":"Ham","LastName":"Burgler"},
{"CustomerId":11,"AccountId":4,"FirstName":"Betty","LastName":"Rubble"},
{"CustomerId":12,"AccountId":4,"FirstName":"Barney","LastName":"Rubble"}]
```

Content negotiation happens by:

1. Request received by server, server gets instance of IContentNegotiator from the HttpConfiguration
2. The config also includes a formatters collection
3. The negotiate method is called, taking the object to serialise, the formatters and the Request
4. The Negotiate method returns the formatter and the media type for the response
	- Or, null if no formatter is found (client gets 406, Not Acceptable)

### Binding

Usually complex types (custom classes) are sent in the message body and simple types like int, bool are sent in the query.

You can add a `[FromUri]` attribute to a parameter to cause it to render complex types:

```
public class Person
{
 public string FirstName { get; set; }
 public string LastName { get; set; }
}

public HttpResponseMessage Get([FromUri] Person person) { /* implementation */}

http://localhost/api/Persons/?FirstName=John&LastName=Doe
```

You can do the inverse with `[FromBody]` causing it to be taken from the message body.

### HttpMessageHandler - process requests & responses

You can add handlers to the pipeline by inheriting DelegatingHandler:

```
public class LoggingMessageHandler: DelegatingHandler
{
 protected async override Task<HttpResponseMessage> SendAsync(HttpRequestMessage request, CancellationToken cancellationToken)
 {
 Debug.WriteLine("Process request");
 var response = await base.SendAsync(request, cancellationToken);
 Debug.WriteLine("Process response");
 return response;
 }
}

...

config.MessageHandlers.Add(new LoggingMessageHandler());
```

You can also cancel calling other handlers, for instance to return early.

You can also add a handler locally to one action with:

```
config.Routes.MapHttpRoute(
 name: "LoggingRoute",
 routeTemplate: "api/sensitive/{id}",
 defaults: new { controller = "sensitive" id = RouteParameter.Optional },
 constraints: null,
 handler: new LoggingMessageHandler()
 );
```

### Dependency injection

When working with dependency injection (to deal with dependency inversion, the D in SOLID), you need to use the `IDependencyResolver` class to implement this in WebAPI:

```
public class ResolveController : IDependencyResolver
{
 public object GetService(Type serviceType)
 {
 return serviceType == typeof(ContentController) ?
 new ContentController(new WebClientContentRepository()) : null;
 }
 public IEnumerable<object> GetServices(Type serviceType)
 {
 return new List<object>();
 }
 public IDependencyScope BeginScope()
 {
 return this;
 }
 public void Dispose() { }
}
```

You also need to configure the resolver: `config.DependencyResolver = new ResolveController();`

There's also the `Unity.WebApi` nuget package that helps do this for you. It installs a bootstrapper.cs which you need to call from Global.asax and you can register dependencies in it:

`container.RegisterType<IContentRepository, WebClientContentRepository>();`


