# Chapter 4

Creating and consuming web API based services


## Part 1

Design a Web API

### Thought experiment

1. By using http verbs in method names, it helps make everything clearer to the end-user and to other programmers what different methods are doing.

2. Content negotiation is useful so that clients can declare the type of returned values they can accept in order for a service to be more utilitarian about it's data - compared to services, which are more likely to be consumed internally, a webAPI may be more likely consumed by regular internet users.

### Quiz

* 1.C/D HttpDelete and HttpPut, respectively, are for deleting and updating content.
* 2.C HttpPost allows form data to be submitted to a service.
* 3.D The `AcceptVerbs` attribute allows a method to be used for multiple actions


## Part 2

Implement a WebAPI

### Thought experiment

1. Web API is well suited to a multi-user, multi-device scenario because it serialises data in JSON and XML which are well-supported across different platforms and fairly universal. It easily allows for either app or web implementations.

2. Content negotiation may be useful to serialise data in a format more useful to the specific app. Dependency injection may be useful where different backend solutions are used. Action filters will probably have a place in the action methods and streaming could be useful for larger files like xrays and scans. HttpMessageHandler could also be useful here.

### Quiz

* 1.A/B Accept-header can be used for json or xml.
* 2.A/B/D - content negotiation works with accept, accept-charset and accept-language.
* 3.B/D to add a global attribute for exceptions, you need to add it to HttpConfiguration.Filters and inherit ExceptionFilterAttribute


## Part 3

Secure a Web api

### Thought experiment

1. Windows authentication is not a good choice when supporting multiple platforms/web browsers

2. Protection against XSRF is always important and must always be guarded against, though is of low priority when working solely with a client app.

3. CORS is not a back-end concern beyond setting up the headers.

### Quiz

* 1.C You can enforce HTTPS globally by adding a required attribute to the global filters collection.
* 2.B You can mitigate XSRF problems by requiring clients submit both a cookie and a form value with a unique token
* 3.C You can use AuthorizeAttribute to write logic related to the current user


## Part 4

Host and manage a web api

### Thought experiment

1. Pros of self hosting include that you don't need the to install IIS and can run the code anywhere you have .net, though cons include that it takes longer to set up and is more error prone. You can't as easily set things like registering the service to run on machine start.

2. The choice of IIS vs Azure websites depends on many factors, such as the cost of infrastructure, expertise with azure, sensetivity of hosted data but if scalability and flexibility is a requirement, Azure could be a good choice as it would allow for rapid expansion and reduction in scale very easily and cheaply.

### Quiz

* 1.B/D To self host you need HttpSelfHostConfiguration and HttpSelfHostServer
* 2.D You need to set up the routes if self hosting.
* 3.B Using a web role might be most useful to allow for scalability with an app that has high peak demand


## Part 5

Consume Web API Services

### Thought experiment

1. HttpClient methods map very neatly to the CRUD methods - HttpPost and PostAsync/PostAsJsonAsync, HttpPut and PutAsync/PutAsJsonAsync, HttpDelete and DeleteAsync and HttpGet and GetAsync.

2. It is useful to create classes that map to the return types so that you can use strongly typed models as they return JSON or XML so if you want to work with the data in code, classes would be more useful.

### Quiz

* 1.C (though D would work) you need to set EnsureSuccessStatusCode and trap any HttpExceptions
* 2.B/D To create a custom formatter for vcards you need to make a buffered formatter and add it to the config.
* 3.B You can use async/await to run tasks concurrently.